The Waldorf Astoria Bar Book

## B

## BACARDI APERITIF

1½ oz. Bacardi gold rum

1½ oz. Dubonnet Rouge or Bonal Quinquina aperitif

½ oz. fresh lime juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass or Champagne coupe filled with crushed or shaved ice. Garnish with orange peel. Serve with small (metal) straw.

In The Old Waldorf Bar Book the title of this cocktail is Bacardi Dubonnet, in the “Cuban Concoctions” chapter. Because it’s not quite the same product as was available during the time of the Old Bar, Dubonnet can also be substituted with sweet vermouth or Bonal aperitif. Its deeper flavor profile makes this cocktail a keeper and I think most closely resembles the original intention. Bacardi gold rum steps in for the original white rum, which complements the vermouth component as opposed to being masked by it. I’ve chosen to include the house-made Grenadine, but you can omit or pour it over as a finishing touch as per your taste. Be sure to release the orange oil from the peel on top of the drink to add some pop for a rediscovered summer sipper.

Another variation exists in the same chapter of the old book: the Havana Opera, which utilizes the same ingredients but uses a dash of lemon juice (I would use a third of an ounce) in lieu of the lime juice listed here. I would stir this and serve it up in a cocktail glass. The original recipe omits the grenadine, but you can include it if you like. It’s a pleasing predinner cocktail either way.

## BACARDI COCKTAIL

2 oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lime wheel.

## BACARDI COCKTAIL NO. 2

2 oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

1 oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. fresh pineapple juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into coupe glass filled with shaved or pellet ice. Garnish with lime wheel.

## (HARRY’S) BACARDI COCKTAIL NO. 3  Classic

2 oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

1 oz. G’Vine Floraison gin

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lime wheel.

Bacardi rum is of Cuban origin and was the most popular brand during the heyday of the Old Bar. The only issue with that is the Bacardi product available during the days of the Old Bar bears little resemblance to the current offering. Although today’s Bacardi will do just fine when preparing these cocktails, I would recommend the Bacardi y Cia Heritage if you can get your hands on it. It’s bottled at 89 proof and is a nice improvement over the standard offering. If it’s unavailable, add a dash of orange bitters to your standard white rum. It will provide a more complex flavor profile and will get you closer to the intent of the original recipe.

The first simple Daiquiri became known as the Bacardi Cocktail in America. The addition of grenadine ensured a life of its own. Old Waldorf Bar Days includes two versions, though others appear with different titles. The first was known as Peg o’ My Heart (named for the Broadway play), and is identical except that it pulls back on the grenadine a bit. It’s unbalanced to me, though completists are free to try it. The Grenadine cocktail is simply a Peg O’ My Heart served Frappé-style, on shaved or crushed ice. The original recipe had a teaspoon of the namesake grenadine. I find it interesting that the original Grenade (see Country Club) was mostly composed of grenadine but this cocktail, with barely a touch, wound up with the identifying ingredient in its title. I wouldn’t be surprised if they were transposed by Mr. Crockett in error. Either way, I left them as history would have them.

To branch out a bit, add half an egg white to the Bacardi Cocktail and you’ll have a September Morn (supposedly named for a painting of the same title). Try it with a Jamaican rum for a more complex twist. For another adaptation, add ¾ oz. fresh orange juice and pull back the grenadine by half, you will have a Raleigh. Again, adding a dash of orange bitters to this one will result in a more complex profile. The Bacardi Cocktail No. 2 includes pineapple juice in place of grenadine.

The third recipe here is an adaptation of Harry MacElhone’s 1919 version in Harry’s ABC of Mixing Cocktails, from his New York Bar, in Paris, which adds gin as an accompanying base ingredient. If we are to deviate from the classic, we may as well go all the way. The softer, floral profile of France’s G’Vine Floraison gin slides right into its slot, honing the rum and unifying the cocktail. If this is unavailable, you could substitute with Hayman’s Old Tom gin.

In 1936, the New York State Supreme Court ruled that in order for this drink to use “Bacardi” in its name, it can only be made with this specific rum. See Cuban Rose, Daiquiri, and Flamingo (listed under Cuban Sunshine) for variations.

## BACARDI PLUS

2 oz. Bacardi Superior white rum

¾ oz. Tempus Fugit crème de cacao

¼ oz. Varnelli l’Anice Secco Speciale anisette

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

This overlooked cocktail should have made it out of the pre-Prohibition era. One of the great qualities of a recipe like this is that it bears tweaking according to personal taste. Do you like the licorice profile of anisette? Use a half-ounce portion of the two liqueurs. An egg white would add another dimension, as would an amber rum. The original recipe did not include a garnish, but I feel that an orange twist makes this beauty sing.

## BACARDI VERMOUTH (Dry or Sweet)

1½ oz. Bacardi Superior white rum

1½ oz. Dolin de Chambery dry vermouth or 1½ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

While developing these recipes, I realized quite quickly that they could find a place at a contemporary bar. Unbelievably easy to make, they over-deliver in their simplicity. Don’t go crazy with these. If you don’t want to enjoy them up, they work on the rocks as well, even with a splash of soda. Subbing in other rums for variety’s sake is a great idea, though I would avoid the spiced variety. Be adventurous. I also tried an array of bitters and found that they may overwhelm the drinks. If you feel they could use a nudge, go ahead, but I recommend a light touch. If I had to choose a garnish, a nice spray of fresh orange or lemon peel livens all three. I would also offer an improved version by using the fine aperitif Cocchi Americano in the vermouth slot, a variation I’ve adapted that begged for inclusion. It’s best on a summer afternoon. A “Perfect Bacardi Vermouth” (equal parts rum and sweet and dry vermouth) is called Four Dollars in the Old Books. Another variation of the Bacardi Vermouth Sweet from the “Cuban Concoctions” chapter is the Havana Smile, which adds a quarter ounce each of lime juice and simple syrup for an interesting alternative, as they nudge this a bit closer to Daiquiri territory in flavor—but please don’t shake it. The citrus is there for balance, not as a fruit component. I would recommend a fuller vermouth such as Carpano Antica, which stands up to the citrus and also improves the balance of the cocktail while giving it a singular identity. See Country Club for variation.

## BACO

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

1½ oz. Bombay London dry gin

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

Twist orange peel over Old Fashioned glass to release oils, then place in glass. Add bitters and muddle briefly. Add gin and vermouth to same glass. Add ice and stir to integrate. Garnish with additional orange peel.

## I.D.K.

2 oz. Nicholson London dry gin or Plymouth gin

1 oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

Place large ice cubes into Old Fashioned glass. Add ingredients and stir briefly to integrate. Garnish with orange peel.

## MONTAUK

1½ oz. New York Distilling Company Dorothy Parker dry gin

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

3 dashes Peychaud’s bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 15 seconds to integrate. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with large ice cubes or sphere. Garnish with lemon peel.

## ST. JOHN

1½ oz. Greenhook Ginsmiths Old Tom gin or Ransom Old Tom gin

1½ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 15 seconds to integrate. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with large ice cubes or sphere. Garnish with lemon peel.

These can be viewed as “one-glass cocktails,” simply prepared but complex enough to be enjoyed on a regular basis. The Baco was traditionally built in the glass, twisting the peels to extract their essence, and though I found that sufficient, I would suggest muddling the bitters and orange peel first for a more thorough extraction. Adding a lemon peel is a nice twist as well. Feel free to expand within the gin category to your personal preference; this recipe can take it. Also listed as Halsey in the Old Books (named for a stockbroker patron of the Old Bar).

The I.D.K. is nearly the same cocktail as the Baco save for the bitters and dry vermouth. Mr. Crockett noted that bartender Johnnie Solan did not know who or what these initials represented. I’d like to think that Solan might have been pulling his leg, alluding to the fact that the letters may have stood for “I Don’t Know.” You can just call this drink—quickly prepared in the serving glass—what it is: a sweet Martini on the rocks. Plymouth gin does a fine job if the Nicholson brand is hard to find. See Cooperstown for I.D.K. No. 2.

As for the Montauk, it’s the Peychaud’s bitters that save the day. The anise note makes for a most interesting summertime sipper. You can prepare this directly in the glass, but like the Negroni, the integration makes for a more complete trip across the palate. Try with a bianco vermouth instead of the dry for a slightly sweeter sundown cocktail.

Propped up by the full-flavored, barrel-aged Old Tom gin, the St. John is an assertive predinner Martini or Manhattan alternative that brings a lot to the table. There is a lasting cola note on the finish that makes this more than worthwhile. The lemon twist tempers the sweet side just enough. A good one.

## BAGPIPER  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. clove-infused Monkey Shoulder blended Scotch whisky

1 oz. Pama pomegranate liqueur

1½ oz. fresh orange juice

3 cloves

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

Clove-Infused Scotch

Add 15 whole cloves to 750 ml. of Scotch whisky for two weeks. Fine-strain and funnel back into bottle.

In an effort to make Scotch whisky more accessible to the drinker who might be intimidated by even the mention of it, the Bagpiper found its way in the world. Pama’s purpose here is to help the Scotch “down the stairs,” and it certainly achieves that! Be certain to count the cloves, as too many will overpower the cocktail’s balance. I love this perennial autumnal and winter favorite for the unique flavor profile. It was a finalist in the 2014 inaugural Pama “Are You Indispensable?” cocktail competition. See Big Country for variation.

## BALLANTINE

2 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Pernod Original Recipe absinthe

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

The original recipe called for equal parts Plymouth gin and dry vermouth, but I found it a bit bland and unbalanced. If you do choose to go that route, I would recommend a heartier London dry–style gin, whose profile will be strong enough to stand up to the vermouth. If you omit the absinthe when preparing this “fifty-fifty” version of the cocktail and only add it as drops on top as a finish, you will have an Opal.

This is also the type of recipe that would call for the absinthe to be “rinsed,” (by placing about a quarter ounce of absinthe in a glass, swirling to coat, and then discarding it), but I found that if I included it in the mix, it helped make for its own identity. For a more concrete measurement, two good dashes equals about an eighth of an ounce.

Post-Crockett, public relations officer Ted Saucier included a drier version of this cocktail in his 1951 book Bottoms Up named La Liberté. He credits the resident manager at the time, Edwin K. Hastings, with its creation in honor of a newly rechristened ocean liner.

The two differences in the recipes are the use of London dry gin called for in the La Liberté (Beefeater would work) and the omission of the orange bitters. Refer to both of these as classic Martinis all dressed up for Saturday night and enjoy them as such.

Yet another variation is named for the tough interrogation practices of the early twentieth century. The Third Degree presents itself as a 7:1 bone-dry Plymouth Martini with the added absinthe (originally without bitters, but you may add the orange variety). This one is certainly worth a try on braver days.

Lastly there is the Fourth Degree. This “mirrored” version slides sweet vermouth in the dry slot. This enhanced original Martini, to which Mr. Crockett credits the patrons of the Old Bar and their relation to an unnamed secret society (Masons? Oddfellows? Even barkeep Johnnie Solan did not know) was first found in print in Straub’s Drinks (1914). It differed from the Old Books version, as his included equal parts of all ingredients. It was way too much of everything. I prefer to believe that the more-than-capable guys at the Old Bar had their own rendition that is immensely more drinkable (a lemon twist is my idea). Bitters were not included, but I think it brightens the final show up a bit. Every once in a while I will feature this for a reception and guests will be wowed, even more so when informed that this simple recipe is over one hundred years old.

## BALTIMORE BRACER FIZZ

2 oz. chilled club soda

1½ oz. Courvoisier VSOP cognac

1 oz. Marie Brizard anisette

½ egg white

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Strain into Fizz glass. Stir briefly to integrate. No garnish.

Bracers were traditionally taken soon after waking in an effort to nullify the prior evening’s overindulgence, until the Internet and the never-ending workday took over. I have modified the portions to lean on the brandy here as opposed to the original equal amounts of spirits, and the result is a noticeable improvement. See Fizz for variations.

## BAYARD BEAUTY FIZZ

2 oz. club soda

2 oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

½ oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

½ egg white

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Strain into Fizz glass. Stir briefly to integrate. No garnish.

Firmly planted in the Bracer category, this delicate item was probably most enjoyed before and throughout lunch at the turn of the twentieth century. The dashes of maraschino and raspberry syrup and just a spoon of lemon juice served as enhancers to the gin. I have ramped these up a bit, which helps round it all out, especially if you prefer to replace the Old Tom with London dry gin. See Clover Club for variations.

## BEE’S KNEES  Classic

2 oz. Citadelle gin

¾ oz. house-made Honey Syrup

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon twist.

## LEAVES OF GRASS  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Zubrowka bison grass vodka

¾ oz. Quinta de Noval 10 Year Old tawny port

½ oz. house-made Honey Syrup

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with one blade of bison grass.

This cocktail emerged during the Prohibition years. It was most likely created to mask the unappealing qualities of the “bathtub” gin of the time. The honey syrup adds not only a depth of flavor but a noticeable viscosity on the palate as well. It’s a classic that has survived with good reason and is the inspiration for the Wax Poetic, a simple twist that uses Zubrowka bison grass vodka, in the gin slot. With its unique lavender and coconut flavor profile and nose, it makes for a completely different profile and one that has turned into a warm-weather guest favorite. For our honey syrup, we use honey harvested from our rooftop bee hives, which were installed by Director of Culinary David Garcelon in 2012. We garnish the finished cocktail with a single blade of actual Polish bison grass (which is happily supplied from Poland by Zubrowka), yet another step away from the Bee’s Knees is the Leaves of Grass. The floral nose that is inherent to bison grass vodka pairs surprisingly well with the complex, slight toffee profile of the ten-year-old port. The lemon brings just enough zip, and the honey adds a tactile weight to the entire offering. Although only incorporating a mere quarter ounce of lemon juice, a stirred variation left something lacking on the finish, so shake away. It’s versatile enough to be served year round, though we serve it in the fall and winter at Peacock Alley.

## BELLINI  Classic

1 oz. peach puree

¾ oz. Combier Pêche de Vigne liqueur

5 oz. Nino Franco Rustico prosecco

Chill all ingredients. This will help prevent spillage during preparation, along with ensuring that it is served at the correct and most enjoyable temperature.

Pour peach puree into mixing glass, then add peach liqueur. Using bar spoon to mix with one hand, slowly add prosecco to glass with your other hand. Be careful not to “break” the prosecco by mixing too quickly and causing it to lose its effervescence. Strain into Champagne flute.

This classic cocktail goes back to 1945, when it was created by Giuseppe Cipriani at Harry’s Bar in Venice, Italy, and named for the Renaissance painter Giovanni Bellini. This is one of our most popular offerings at Peacock Alley because our bar happens to open at eleven thirty a.m. daily. We also routinely pour well over 150 of these each Sunday during our famous brunch season. In the summer, I highly recommend fresh peach puree, using ripe white peaches if they can be had. We use a commercial puree (Les vergers Boiron) for consistency’s sake. A more refreshing quaff and head clearer is nearly impossible to find. See Champagne Cocktail for variations.

## BERMUDA HIGHBALL

1 oz. Château de Montifaud VSOP cognac

1 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Contratto bianco vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

3 oz. club soda

Add spirits and bitters to Collins glass. Add large ice cubes and fill with club soda. Garnish with orange peel (or lemon peel).

After various attempts with different brands of dry vermouth, the winner turned out to be a restrained bianco vermouth. It added the herbal and slightly sweet note that brings out the best qualities of the gin and especially the cognac. The difference may make this as popular as I think it was when it was served at the Old Bar. Initially, some may be taken aback from the combination of brandy and gin, but with the addition of the bianco vermouth (Contratto is a nineteenth-century brand that peaked in the 1930s but has recently returned with its original recipe), there seems to be a fusion at the molecular level that makes this quite the refresher. Later recipes substitute ginger ale for the club soda, but I stand by the Waldorf- Astoria original, though the orange bitters and a twist of peel does ratchet it up with a welcome brightness.

## BERRY

2 oz. Santa Teresa 1796 Ron Antiguo de Solera rum

¾ oz. fresh orange juice

½ oz. fresh pineapple juice

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

2 dashes Dale DeGroff’s pimento aromatic bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

This largely unknown rum-based cocktail does not appear in Old Waldorf Bar Days, but makes its first appearance in the “Cuban Concoctions” chapter of the second Old Waldorf-Astoria Bar Book. The rum used, of course, was Bacardi, but I took this opportunity to imagine a different flavor profile and use an aged rum at its base. I also modified the juices to include lemon, which was not in the original recipe at all; it helps temper the sugar level of the original. I’ve added pimento bitters for backbone and complexity. This has become a new Peacock Alley summertime favorite. As for the namesake ingredient, your guess is as good as mine, though feel free to garnish with one.

## BERRY BREEZE  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Farmer’s botanical small batch organic gin infused with fresh raspberries, strawberries, and blueberries

¾ oz. Luxardo Triplum orange liqueur

1 oz. fresh lime juice

3 fresh basil leaves

2 oz. club soda

Add all ingredients except club soda to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into Collins glass filled with ice cubes. Top with club soda. Garnish with fresh berries.

## BLUEBERRY AND BASIL SMASH  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Farmer’s botanical small batch organic gin infused with frozen blueberries

1 oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

½ egg white

4 fresh basil leaves

Add all ingredients to mixing glass and dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake well for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with ice cubes. Garnish with basil leaf.

Infused Gin

½ cup each of fresh raspberries, strawberries, and blueberries (for Berry Breeze)

1 liter bottle 80 proof gin

Or

1½ cups frozen blueberries (for Blueberry and Basil Smash)

Add fruit and gin to airtight glass container and let sit for 7 to 10 days. Fine-strain and funnel back into bottle. Best if used within 3 months.

The Berry Breeze is a favorite of our summertime guests and for good reason: the freshness of the summer produce in concert with the basil (which from 2012 onward has been grown in our rooftop garden) completely and triumphantly represents the season. Gaz Regan included this recipe in The Bartender’s Gin Compendium.

Another simple but ultra-refreshing summertime Cooler is the Blueberry and Basil Smash. Basil, an iconic representative of summer, pairs extremely well with its fellow ingredients here. For the blueberry gin, I settled on using frozen blueberries in lieu of fresh for the infusion because they are more concentrated and yield a much more consistent result. Be sure to use a gin that is lower in alcohol (80 proof), as the real enjoyment of this one lies in the second serving. Each modified gin can be used in either recipe for excellent results.

## BIG COUNTRY  Peacock Alley

2 oz. clove-infused Monkey Shoulder blended Scotch whisky

1 oz. Wölffer rosé wine or any Provence-style rosé

⅓ oz. house-made Honey-Ginger Syrup

Pinch of paprika

Add all ingredients except paprika to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Add pinch of paprika to top of cocktail to finish.

## SCOTTISH HIGHLANDS, HERE WE COME  Peacock Alley

2 oz. clove-infused Monkey Shoulder blended Scotch whisky

¾ oz. house-made Honey-Ginger Syrup

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Clove-Infused Scotch

Add 15 whole cloves in 750 ml. bottle of Scotch whisky and let sit for 2 weeks. Fine-strain and funnel back into bottle.

The complex Big Country cocktail was created for our annual Battle of the Bees honey-tasting contest in 2014. It has become one of the Hotel’s more high-profile media events, promoting rooftop beehives around New York City. The charity-focused (and good-natured) competition has been judged by such culinary notables as Chef Eric Ripert, of Le Bernardin, among others. A great time was had by all and our honey came out on top!

Scottish Highlands was created for a guest’s special request for a warm-weather Scotch whisky cocktail. Again, we use our rooftop honey.

Preparation tip: If you don’t have the time to prepare the Honey-Ginger Syrup, you can just chop and muddle a one-inch piece of fresh ginger with Honey Syrup and then proceed as directed. See Bagpiper for variation.

## BIJOU (Old Bar Variation)

1½ oz. Grand Marnier

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

1 dash Angostura bitters

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## ADAPTED WALDORF ASTORIA VARIATION

1½ oz. Plymouth gin

¾ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## SAVOY VARIATION

1½ oz. Beefeater London dry gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

½ oz. green Chartreuse

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry and lemon twist.

The Waldorf Astoria version of this cocktail, named for a Broadway theater of the day, is one of the few recipes that appear in all five Waldorf Astoria–related cocktail books, including Jacques Straub’s Drinks, Ted Saucier’s Bottoms Up, and Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails. Orange bitters are the choice of Mr. Crockett’s books, while both Tschirky and Saucier use aromatic. I recommend the more robust aromatic bitters, as they temper the sugar quotient of the Grand Marnier, though I’ve listed one dash of each in the Old Bar variation. Ultimately, it’s your call. Another slight adjustment will also make a great lower-alcohol cocktail by transposing to a 2:1 vermouth to Grand Marnier ratio—also a must-try.

The Adapted Waldorf Astoria Variation included here is a riff on Christopher Lawlor’s version in The Mixicologist (1895). This twist adds gin as a component but uses equal amounts of all ingredients. Sweet but potable, the drink is improved by upping the gin (stick with lower-alcohol and less aromatic gins, as they tend to blend best with the other ingredients here). I swapped the Grand Marnier for dry curaçao and the difference is a notable upgrade in complexity and drinkability.

Neither of these is to be confused with Harry Craddock’s  cocktail, made famous in The Savoy Cocktail Book (and in Straub’s Drinks) and what you will most likely get if you call for this cocktail around the world today. Based on Harry Johnson’s 1882 Bartenders’ Manual Frappé (served over crushed or shaved ice), it too called for equal parts of all ingredients. The obvious difference between the Waldorf and these notable variations is the use of sweet vermouth and green Chartreuse, which makes the drinks potable but cloying. I have adjusted and adapted ingredient amounts and style of gin to appeal to a modern palate in hopes that you could enjoy a second one. All told, I think that all of these cocktails can take to personal adjustments and that a bit of citrus peel sprites all of them up tremendously.

## BIRD

2 oz. Cointreau

1 oz. Pierre Ferrand 1840 cognac

Twist two large orange peels into Old Fashioned glass or tumbler. Fill with crushed or shaved ice. Add ingredients. Twist two additional orange peels for garnish. Serve with small metal straw.

The end result of this uniquely presented offering is ever so appealing. Research points to this old-timer being an indigenous special of the Old Bar. The ceremony of the preparation is sure to impress your guests, and this would be great for user participation as well. You can use equal amounts of spirits here, but I think it’s best to let the curaçao do the heavy lifting, as was the original intention. Try with dry curaçao or Grand Marnier leading the way in the cooler months. Either way, I heartily recommend this as an after-dinner sipper.

## BISCOTTI AND CREAM  Peacock Alley

1¼ oz. Faretti biscotti liqueur

1¼ oz. Boulard Grand Solage VSOP calvados

1½ oz. house-made White Cocoa Mix

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Place thin chocolate biscotti across top of glass.

This dessert in a glass was created with our wintertime post-theater guest in mind. Faretti biscotti liqueur is an almond biscotti in a bottle. It’s very concentrated but balanced with notes of cocoa and vanilla, which somehow pair extremely well with the apple-forward profile of the calvados. Along with the White Cocoa Mix, the chocolate biscotti garnish is provided by executive pastry chef Charlie Romano and his world--class pastry team.

## BISHOP

2 oz. 86 Co. Caña Brava white rum

1 oz. pinot noir

½ oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. house-made Demerara Syrup

2 dashes Dale DeGroff’s pimento bitters (or allspice dram)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Adapted to celebrate the one hundredth anniversary of the completion of the Panama Canal and the signing of the treaty that took place in the Old Hotel in 1914, this should not be confused with the Sangaree or Punch of the same name. The original Waldorf-Astoria recipe called for white rum, so I used an aged Panamanian rum here along with pimento bitters. This quencher was served until the start of Prohibition in 1920.

The demerara syrup adds a bit of viscosity and weight to the finish. I would suggest not using your best or heaviest grape in the wine slot. I settled on pinot noir, as it’s delicate enough not to overpower the other ingredients yet assertive enough to add tannin and grip, which makes this cocktail unique.

## BISHOP POKER

1 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

1 oz. Noilly Prat dry vermouth

⅓ oz. Bigallet “China-China” Amer liqueur

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## BISHOP POTTER (JACQUES STRAUB VERSION)

1½ oz. Plymouth gin

¾ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

⅓ oz. Calisaya liqueur

2 dashes Regan’s Orange Bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## NEWMAN

1½ oz. Plymouth gin

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

⅓ oz. Bigallet China-China Amer liqueur

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## LIEUTENANT COLONEL

2½ oz. Carpano dry vermouth

½ oz. Bigallet China-China Amer liqueur

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon and orange peel.

Okay, here’s one that gets the “chicken or the egg” award. Jacques Straub’s 1914 recipe book, Drinks, which at the very least was influenced by The Old Waldorf Astoria Bar Book (he was probably given access to the actual book by Oscar Tschirky; it predates Straub’s publication by seventeen years), cites calisaya and orange bitters as the accoutrements to its Bishop Potter. They allow the gin to take the lead. (I enjoy using Calisaya liqueur here, as it adds a bit of body.) Mr. Crockett somehow comes to a completely different name by possibly misinterpreting the title (Bishop Poker) and story of origin, dedicating a whole paragraph to its questionable beginnings while utilizing equal portions of ingredients. Either way, I’ve tried every combination and decided to include the Straub version here because it was first in print and the ingredients in Mr. Crockett’s recipe are represented several times over in the other recipes.

I personally prefer the drier Newman variation, which was named for a frequenter of the Old Bar who owned a resort near the Old Hotel. I can easily see this becoming a mainstay on the cocktail list at Peacock Alley. If you split the portion of vermouth between sweet and dry, you will have what the Old Books called a Milliken (I prefer mine with an orange twist).

The Coxey subs in sweet vermouth in the dry slot of the Newman. It was named for Ohioan Jacob Coxey’s famous 1894 march on Washington, D.C., where he led unemployed protesters known as Coxey’s Army in an effort to gain employment during the worst U.S. economic depression known until that point. He caused quite the ruckus. Whether Mr. Coxey knew that his influence reached as far as the east side of Midtown Manhattan will probably remain unknown. A very close relative of this drink, but unrelated to the oldest printed recipe of the same name (William Schmidt, The Flowing Bowl, 1891), the Fin de Siècle, is also included in the Old Books. It leans on the Plymouth with a 2:1 ratio to vermouth and includes orange bitters. If including the bitters, I would pull back the Amer to a quarter ounce. It’s very much worth a try.

The Lieutenant Colonel was a fifty-fifty dry vermouth and Amer hybrid, a nonstarter for me no matter how I played it. I adapted this one by leaning on the fuller-flavored vermouth to carry this easy, predinner aperitif. I used the two twists because I couldn’t really settle on either, as they both worked exceptionally well. You can fiddle with the ratio to your personal taste. This will remain in my rotation for a long time to come.

## BISMARCK FIZZ

3 oz. chilled club soda

2½ oz. German Riesling (trocken or other dry style preferred)

1 oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add chilled club soda to small Collins glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Collins glass. Stir briefly to integrate. No garnish.

This easy-drinking Fizz (true to its German roots, as the popular spritzer began there) is most likely named for the nineteenth-century first Chancellor of Germany, Otto von Bismarck (hence the wine component). Although the original recipes suggest a sweet version of German wine, I feel the drier, contrasting trocken-style’s acidity adds complexity. Shake with a few mint leaves (and fine-strain) for a pleasing seasonal variation.

## BLACK CHERRY SODA  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Black Cherry Infusion Absolut vodka (recipe follows)

4 oz. club soda

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine (for float)

Add infused vodka to chilled Collins glass. Add large ice cubes and fill with club soda. Top with grenadine. Garnish with lemon peel and brandied cherry.

Black Cherry Infusion

1 c. fresh black cherries, split

1 liter Absolut vodka

Place all ingredients in airtight glass container for 7 days. Fine-strain and funnel back into bottle. Best if used within 3 months.

This refreshing summer Cooler is a perennial guest favorite. Using fresh cherries for the infusion makes for a drier and slightly tart Highball. I prefer preparing this in season and using fresh cherries, as the dried variety makes for a much sweeter result. You can utilize most any clear spirit as the base (white rum, Old Tom gin, pisco, etc.) but in this case I think that the vodka delivers the subtle fruit in its purest form. Expect this to be a hit at your next barbecue.

## BLACKJACK

1 oz. Etter Zuger kirsch cherry brandy

½ oz. Hardy VSOP cognac

½ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

1 oz. French roast coffee (strongly brewed and cooled to room temperature or chilled)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

This cocktail is named for the leather-covered lead hand weapon of nineteenth- and twentieth-century criminals, and mandatory equipment for police departments of the era. The original had this shaken with equal parts kirschwasser and coffee and only a dash of brandy. That variation sorely needed some viscosity as well as a touch of sweetness for balance. After developing about a dozen models, I settled on this one. The maraschino makes for the perfect sweetness and pairing to the ramped-up portion of brandy that adds body. A find as an after-dinner cocktail. See Café Kirsch for variation.

## BLACK STRIPE (BLACKSTRAP)

¾ oz. cold water

⅓ oz. Plantation blackstrap molasses

2 oz. Pusser’s British Navy rum

Add water and molasses to Old Fashioned glass and stir to combine. Add rum and stir to combine. Fill with crushed or pellet ice. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg.

This ancient Toddy template dates back a few centuries, and is not for the faint of heart; blackstrap molasses can curl some toes. This old-timer can be adapted to a hot beverage and is much more palatable that way. Just replace the cold water with a couple of ounces of hot water. Honey is often mentioned as an ingredient in other recipes and would make for an easier-drinking example, but you won’t earn your pirate stripes that way. See “Hot Drinks” chapter for variation.

## BLOOD AND SAND  Classic

1½ oz. Chivas Regal 12 Year Old blended Scotch whisky

1 oz. blood orange juice (Valencia or Naval orange can be substituted)

¾ oz. Heering cherry liqueur

¾ oz. Punt e Mes vermouth

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with flamed orange coin (optional) and brandied cherry.

Named for the 1922 Rudolph Valentino film of the same name, this often-overlooked cocktail is nonetheless frequently ordered at Peacock Alley. I have adjusted the portions of each ingredient to reflect the taste of the modern drinker’s palate (and mine) by ramping up the amount of Scotch, transforming it into a base ingredient. The original recipes call for equal amounts of each item, but I found it a bit cloying and muddy. The bitter orange notes of the Punt e Mes vermouth were a nice surprise. The beauty of most of the best cocktails is that they take well to a bit of tinkering.

## BLOODY BUNNY  Peacock Alley

2 dashes Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce

1 dash Tabasco sauce

Pinch kosher salt

Pinch coarse black pepper

Pinch celery seed

2 oz. Tito’s Handmade vodka

4 oz. fresh carrot juice (Bolthouse Farms or other commercially available, if necessary)

Toasted coriander powder, pink peppercorn, and kosher salt rim

FOR RIM:

¼ c. coriander powder

⅛ c. fine-ground pink peppercorns

2 tbsp. kosher salt

Add all ingredients to airtight sealable plastic container and shake to combine. Place on shallow plate. Using fresh lemon wedge, moisten half of rim of glass and roll rim through the mixture. Fill with large ice cubes.

FOR DRINK PREPARATION:

Add all ingredients to mixing glass in order listed. Add large ice cubes and roll between mixing glass and shaker 3 to 5 times. Strain into prepared Collins glass. Garnish with ⅓ celery stalk and thin coin of carrot, notched to sit on nonrimmed side of glass.

This brunch-inspired concoction was devised for a guest’s special event and I’ve been featuring it every Sunday since. Chef Cedric Tovar helped create the coriander and pink peppercorn rim and it makes all the difference. We originally toasted the spices in a hot dry pan for a minute or so prior to grinding, which is recommended when you want to elevate the result even more. I have also enjoyed a bay leaf–infused vodka here. Just place three or four dried bay leaves in a bottle of (unflavored) vodka of your choice for two weeks and you are ready to go (works great with standard Bloody Mary as well).

## BLOODY MARY  Classic

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

2 dashes Lea & Perrins Worcestershire sauce

2 dashes Tabasco sauce

½ bar spoon of freshly grated horseradish (jarred works, if fresh is unavailable)

Pinch kosher salt

Pinch coarse black pepper

Pinch celery seed (omit kosher salt if using celery salt)

Pinch light brown sugar

4 oz. chilled Sacramento tomato juice

2 oz. Tito’s Handmade vodka

(Or 5 oz. house-made Bloody Mary Mix)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass in order listed. Add large ice cubes and roll between mixing glass and shaker 3 to 5 times and transfer to chilled Collins glass. Place lemon wedge on side of glass. Garnish with ⅓ celery stalk. Optional garnish: prepare skewer with Peppadew (sweet pepper), cornichon (small French pickle), cocktail onion, and Queen Anne olive and place across top of glass.

This drink’s tomato juice base is best prepared the night before you plan on using it (do not add spirit or lemon juice), as the integration of ingredients makes a big difference. Try it for yourself and compare. We make this by the batch at Peacock Alley and even more during our brunch season, as Bloody Marys are ordered by the tray.

The base recipe can be adjusted to taste: add more Tabasco or substitute your personal favorite hot sauce (smoked or chipotle variations work well), celery salt, dried celery flakes (my wife Margaret’s preference), etc. You can omit the brown sugar for the classic version, but I have been adding it for years, though you should never taste its presence. It’s there to only provide background contrast, especially as spicier Bloody Marys have become the norm lately.

Early on, we attempted using freshly blended tomatoes and juice, and though it’s a unique and tasty variation, it just did not hold a candle to the canned version, especially when it came to viscosity.

There are conflicting stories as to the origin of the Bloody Mary. Some cite actor George Jessel, who, in the 1920s, supposedly combined vodka and tomato juice as tonic for his hangovers. The other name that comes up is St. Regis barman, the Frenchman Fernand Petiot. Yet another story offers an archaeological answer in a nonalcoholic version called the Oyster Cocktail, from the Manhattan nightlife of the late 1800s. One thing is for certain: the Bloody Mary has survived for a reason. Its cold, savory, and spicy profile provides the morning tide to wash away even the most persistent “night befores.”

As for classic spirit variations, the Red Snapper substitutes London dry gin for the vodka and is a New York staple, most known for being the signature cocktail at the King Cole Bar in the St. Regis Hotel. The Bloody Maria features tequila as the base spirit (preferably blanco 100 percent agave, but a good mezcal works as well). You may want to sub in fresh lime juice for the lemon, but other than that, it’s the same drink. The Bloody Caesar, popularized in the late 1960s at Calgary, Canada’s Westin Hotel’s Owl’s Nest Bar, is a Bloody Mary that includes Clamato, a clam juice and tomato juice hybrid. This version is best with raw or cold seafood. Finally, the Bloody Bull shares base ingredient duties by adding beef stock in equal parts to the tomato juice. It’s thinner on the palate, but the stock adds a richness and a savory drinkability some may prefer.

It’s an absolute necessity to roll this cocktail. Shaking will severely dilute the tomato juice, and it will lose its signature thickness. Straining over fresh ice is not necessary as long as the ice cubes you are using are still around an inch and a quarter in size, post-roll. Incidentally, it’s become common practice for bars and restaurants to rim the top of the serving glass with a myriad of salts and spices. I typically don’t partake in this practice at Peacock Alley (the Bloody Bunny notwithstanding), as I feel it gets in the way of the already complex drink, but if you do, I would pull back on the hot sauce in the base mix a bit and allow the rim to add the heat. I like a spicy Hungarian paprika and salt mix here. Garnishes have also come to represent the host bar’s identity, but I think less is more. Other than your preference of pickled vegetables (green bean, asparagus, carrot, etc.), I would steer clear of adding any other food items to this or any other cocktail. Shrimp, bacon, and the like belong on a plate and not in a cocktail or drink. Would you believe there exist hamburger slider on a skewer and whole Cornish hen on a skewer versions? If I hadn’t seen it for myself, I wouldn’t either.

## BLUE MOON  Oscar Tschirky’s Variation

2 oz. Nolet’s Silver dry gin or Hendrick’s gin

½ oz. crème Yvette

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Though not mentioned in either of Mr. Crockett’s books, this cocktail can be found in Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails, published in 1934. His recipe (which added red wine!), was a take on an earlier version published in Recipes for Mixed Drinks (1917), by Hugo R. Ensslin, in which I would add two-thirds of an ounce of dry vermouth and a dash of orange bitters to the recipe above, to meet his intention. A fine rendering. Oscar’s base ingredient was Old Tom gin, but I found it left the recipe leaning too heavily on the crème Yvette and made it unbalanced. I’ve also tried several London dry styles of varying proofs and they all performed serviceably, though they did not help the end result rise above the field. However, if your tastes remain undaring, it will yield the traditional and intended result.

I chose the unique floral qualities of both Nolet’s Silver dry gin and Hendrick’s gin to pair with the crème Yvette, led by Nolet’s saffron note, which gives the Blue Moon its own identity. Either way, it worked for me. There is a “juiced” and probably more popular version (first found in 1941’s Crosby Gaige’s Cocktail Guide) listed as an Aviation variation that did not contain any maraschino liqueur. It simply added a half ounce of fresh lemon juice to Oscar’s recipe and is shaken, of course. In the summer months this version will end the day with a swirl. Top off with a touch of club soda, if you’re opting to serve it on ice. See Aviation for variation.

## BORDELAISE

2 oz. Trimbach Framboise Grande Reserve raspberry brandy

¾ oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

4 oz. chilled club soda

Add ingredients to Collins glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate. Garnish with lemon peel.

You’re right, bordelaise sauce does not include berries of any kind. This tweaked Rickey presentation does find its way into both of the Old Books and is quite the Cooler. The original required a kirsch (cherry) eau-de-vie. I replaced the kirsch with framboise (raspberry) to match the syrup. A real summer winner.

## BOWMAN BACARDI

1 oz. Bacardi Superior white rum

1 oz. Bacardi 8 Year Old dark rum

1 oz. fresh orange juice

¼ oz. Simple Syrup

6 mint leaves

2 dashes Dale DeGroff’s pimento bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with 1 mint leaf.

According to Mr. Crockett, it’s named for nineteenth-century hotelier John McEntee Bowman, who introduced modern hotel management to Havana, Cuba. Once there, he apparently fell in love with its native spirit (Bacardi rum), and he became the product’s unofficial ambassador. The original called for Bacardi white rum, but I felt it could take a step up in flavor, so I split it with the full-flavored Bacardi 8 Year Old dark and it makes all the difference. The use of mint is here to complement the other ingredients, so be sure not to overdo it. The addition of the pimento bitters brings it all home, though Angostura will do in a pinch. Double-straining ensures a clean presentation.

## BRADLEY-MARTIN

1½ oz. Tempus Fugit crème de menthe

1 oz. Tempus Fugit crème de cacao

Add ingredients to Old Fashioned glass with cubed or crushed ice. Stir briefly to integrate.

This cocktail is named for society leaders of the day who hosted a poorly timed, much ballyhooed, and opulent ball on February 10, 1897, at the Old Hotel. Condemned by local and even the world press, the Bradley-Martins went ahead as planned with their ball, as unemployment rates soared and the country was in the worst economic era of its history to that point. The tally amounted to more than $350,000 for the one-night grand ballroom event (about $10 million today). Public dissatisfaction ran so high that there were rumors of bombs being placed at the home of the Bradley-Martins.

Though the memory of the controversy wanes over time, its namesake survivor is an inoffensive after-dinner drink if there ever was one. Simply presented here with superior ingredients, it can be loosely translated as a Grasshopper without the cream. It’s surprisingly unfancy.

## BRAMBLE  Classic

2 oz. Spencerfield Spirit Edinburgh gin

1 oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

½ oz. Giffard crème de mûre

Add all ingredients except crème de mûre to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with crushed or pellet ice. Top with crème de mûre. Garnish with one fresh blackberry on a skewer.

## ROOFTOP RAMBLE  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Nolet’s Silver gin

1 oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

½ egg white

4 fresh basil leaves (cleaned and stemmed)

2 oz. chilled club soda

½ oz. Combier Crème de Fruits rouges

Add all ingredients except basil, Combier, and club soda to mixing glass and dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add basil and ice and shake well for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with large ice cubes. Add club soda and stir briefly to integrate. Float Crème de Fruits Rouges over top. No garnish.

Created in the 1980s in London’s Soho neighborhood by Dick Bradsell, the Bramble became a modern-day classic. There’s no reason to overthink this one, but if you like, try muddling six midsummer blackberries in lieu of the blackberry liqueur float (or use just a touch of the liqueur in the muddling process) for a drier and fresher result (just be sure to fine-strain).

The Peacock Alley variation is known as the Rooftop Ramble. I used Nolet’s Silver gin (a uniquely flavored spirit with a perfumed finish that pairs nicely with citrus) in the lead role and added the touch of egg white. I like the way it tempers all the ingredients and takes a bit of edge off. The crème de fruits rouges is a five-berry blend liqueur that also fits snuggly into its slot. I added a few fresh basil leaves from our rooftop garden (hence the title) shaken in for a nice outcome. You could omit the club soda but it keeps it light (and another step away from the Bramble).

## BRANDY CHAMPERELLE COCKTAIL

2 oz. Courvoisier VSOP cognac

½ oz. Luxardo Triplum triple sec

½ oz. Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## BRANDY CHAMPERELLE POUSSE-CAFÉ

⅓ oz. Luxardo Triplum triple sec

¼ oz. Dr. Adam Elmegirab’s Boker’s bitters or Angostura bitters

⅓ oz. Courvoisier VSOP cognac (or Lustau Don Nuño oloroso sherry)

Add all ingredients, in order listed, to pony or small sherry glass. No garnish.

Different versions of this mid-nineteenth-century creation appear in each of the Old Books.

The 1931 book (Old Waldorf Bar Days) includes sherry as the identifying ingredient and serves it in a pony glass, à la the Pousse-Café (see “Historical Concoctions” chapter).

The 1934 Old Waldorf-Astoria Bar Book lists brandy in the sherry slot; this is also how it first appeared in print in Jerry Thomas’ Bartenders Guide (1862). Other previous recipes list maraschino liqueur in the curaçao or triple sec slot, which is also worth a try.

I did happen across a recipe in William Terrington’s Cooling Cups and Dainty Drinks (1869) that presented these ingredients as a cocktail, and since it’s from the same era as the other versions and is a serious upgrade from the digestif serving, I feel it is worthy of inclusion here. Although Mr. Terrington specified bitters as a main ingredient, he could have meant an aromatized wine such as Bonal (which would’ve been referred to as a bitter; you can try it that way). I used the unusual portion of Angostura bitters and it lent an amaro-like flavor profile and viscosity to the finished product and proved too tempting a result to pass up (cutting to the chase with an actual amaro works too). I think this delivers a unique after-dinner offering either way.

## BRANDY COCKTAIL NO. 2

1½ oz. Royer Force 53 cognac or Boulard Grand Solage VSOP calvados

1½ oz. Dolin de Chambery dry vermouth

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

1 dash Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

After experimentation with an applejack and calvados for base ingredients as listed in the original recipes, it was the cognac variation, with its fuller body and finish, that took the title. Both have merit, but I prefer the cognac version.

I’ve added a dash of orange and aromatic bitters, but if you omit one, make it the aromatic, especially with the calvados-based version. Either way, a snap of a lemon peel adds zip for lovers of dry yet flavorful cocktails.

## BRANDY CRUSTA

2 oz. Kelt VSOP cognac

½ oz. Cointreau

¼ oz. house-made Demerara Syrup

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice

1 dash Angostura bitters

1 dash Peychaud’s bitters

Prior to building this cocktail, moisten rim of small goblet or wineglass with lemon wedge (about ½ inch down), then carefully dab and roll in superfine sugar on a small plate.

Peel a lemon in one long swath (or if you prefer orange, this works as well and is slightly easier to peel in the called-for fashion). Carefully place in glass by curling peel around the inside.

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into prepared glass.

Originating in New Orleans in the 1850s from creative Italian barman Joseph Santini, and debuting in print courtesy of Jerry Thomas a short time later, the Brandy Crusta is a true “big bang” cocktail, named for the sugar crust applied to both citrus rind and glass. It’s undeniably linked to its direct descendant, the Sidecar (and by association, the Margarita, in the evolutionary cocktail chain). One must be cognizant not to overdo this first-generation classic. All of the accompanying accoutrements are only there to adorn the main ingredient. In fact, I have included a very good cognac and brought just about every modifying ingredient to its absolute limit to ensure that any personal adjustments be made by subtraction.

One ingredient found in later versions is maraschino liqueur. If so inclined, feel free to add a quarter ounce of Luxardo maraschino, substituting it for Cointreau. A nice orange alternate to the Cointreau is Grand Marnier or event Pierre Ferrand’s dry curaçao. Although it’s not included in the Old Books, I would also consider a dash of Peychaud’s bitters, as an homage to its New Orleans roots; it adds a bit to the nose and tannin on the palate as well. The Old Books include a Rum Crusta variation. Just use a dark and flavorful variety in the brandy slot.

From my personal experience, preparing this drink in the presence of an intended loved one can’t help but impress. Just try it once or twice beforehand, to work out the kinks.

## BRANDY FLOAT

2 oz. chilled club soda

1½ oz. Royer VSOP cognac

Add three large ice cubes or sphere to rocks glass. Add club soda. Float cognac on top. Twist orange peel to release oils, then discard.

Yes, it’s as simple as it sounds, but simplicity has its merits. It’s a great post-dinner treat, especially in the summertime when the thought of a neat cognac might be a bit overwhelming. I’ve added a spray of an orange peel that was not included in the original recipe just to brighten it up a bit.

## BRANDY PUNCH

2 oz. Royer Force 53 cognac

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

½ oz. cold water

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add large ice cubes, roll between mixing glass and shaker 3 to 5 times, and transfer to Old Fashioned glass or Hoffman House goblet. Garnish with fresh, seasonal fruit.

Derived from one of the earliest (large format) Punch recipes, Brandy Punch was first found in print in 1695. Punches of that era leaned on limes for their citrus profile, as lemon did not come into favor until the mid-nineteenth century. By the time the Old Bar got around to serving these, lemons were the choice, as Mr. Crockett noted in both books. This evolved to be the made-to-order version of a classic Punch. Presentation counts here, so look to adorn with berries and an orange wheel, if possible.

## BRONX  Modern

1½ oz. Beefeater London dry gin

½ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

1 oz. fresh orange juice

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6 (optional)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## BRONX  Old Waldorf Bar Days Variation

1½ oz. Plymouth gin

¾ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

2 orange peels (two 1-by-2-inch peels, snapped to release oils, then added to mixing glass)

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Of all the cocktails associated with or attributed to the Hotel, not one—not even the venerable Rob Roy—was as popular as the Bronx. Sometimes referred to as the Cosmopolitan of its day, it was one of the most requested cocktails prior to Prohibition.

Despite plenty of controversy over the truth about its origins, I would like to think that one of the Waldorf’s fine bartenders was responsible for creating this cocktail. In Old Waldorf Bar Days, Mr. Crockett devotes a whole chapter to the subject, quoting Waldorf barman Johnnie Solan at length (though newspaper articles of the day cite another house barman, John “Curley” O’Connor, as its creator). Solan explains that it was based on another popular cocktail, the Duplex. As the legend goes, he had just finished preparing one when a waiter challenged him to create a new quencher on the spot. He basically added gin and orange juice to the Duplex and the Bronx was born—supposedly named for rowdy guests who reminded him of a recent trip to the zoo. It met with the waiter’s approval and became the lunchtime special. Interestingly, Solan’s story tells of going from using a dozen oranges a day to several cases. I love to imagine a time when rivers of gin and juice were consumed before three p.m. Those were the days.

If you believe that the Bronx is indeed an evolution of the Duplex, it stands to reason that a fair amount of vermouth would have remained and would not have diminished to bar-spoon levels, and that by ramping up the juice, you get the originally intended refresher that was a staple of the lunchtime bar. You can tinker all you want with brands of vermouth, levels of potency, styles of gin and genever, even varieties of oranges, but what’s most essential for me, in the end, is a dash of orange bitters, as it adds a bit of spice and backbone that orange juice lacks.

That said, some of the controversy over this cocktail should be addressed. The first time the Bronx appears in book form is in William “Cocktail” Boothby’s World Drinks and How to Mix Them, 1908 edition. In Boothby’s book, as well as in Jacques Straub’s Drinks (1914) and Mr. Crockett’s first Old Waldorf Bar Days (1931), the Bronx is a true cocktail, a Perfect Martini accented by either an orange peel or a bar spoon of juice, stirred, and served with an orange twist. Now, whether Mr. Solan’s real contribution to the Bronx was not in adding gin and juice to the Duplex, but in adding more juice to the already existing cocktail that was the Bronx, will never be known. Either way, it seems that the boys of the Old Bar had that covered anyway—later in the book the Jazz appears, whose listing reads: “Same as Bronx, with plenty of orange juice.” The Old Bar’s original Bronx is transformed into the modern Bronx recipe by following this directive. Old Waldorf Bar Days mentions that there were already plenty of variations around, and also includes Johnnie Solan’s rendition.

As for the Jazz, I would separate this from the previous two recipes by adding another ounce of juice—perfect to serve at your next jazz brunch, on the rocks, as a refined head clearer.

A Cuban Bronx uses Bacardi white rum as the base ingredient, though in my view the amber variety brings a more heightened result.

Making a Dry Bronx by omitting the sweet vermouth and doubling the portion of dry vermouth, as in the modern recipe, will give you what the Old Books called a Passipe. It’s not for everyone, but if your tastes lean toward the dry side of things, it’s more than worth a try.

If you do the opposite, making sweet vermouth the star and omitting the dry, you will have a Widow, which is more of a crowd-pleaser, but decidedly much less balanced, in my opinion.

The Old Books list a recipe for the Cooperstown as “a Bronx shaken with fresh mint.” Although this works pretty well, other printed recipes omit the orange juice and present it as a stirred cocktail. See Cooperstown for variation. The last namesake recipe is the Waldorf Bronx, which appears, strangely enough, within the Manhattan-like Waldorf cocktail entry in Old Waldorf Bar Days. Mr. Crockett notes that it was never entered into the actual Bar Book but was a popular order by those who “sometimes tired of the ordinary ‘Bronx.’” He cites Johnnie Solan again, offering that “it was composed of two-thirds gin, one-third orange juice and two slices of fresh pineapple.” It is, at its heart, a pineapple-enhanced Orange Blossom No. 2.

The Orange Blossom, with its own signature controversy, warrants its own lengthy entry later in this book.

Another related title can be found in Mr. Straub’s Drinks under Chantecler, in which he claims that drink to be a “Bronx with four dashes of grenadine syrup.” You can try it if you want, but don’t go out of your way. See Chanticleer for the Waldorf Astoria variant.

A cocktail surprisingly missing from the Old Books but name-checked in other books of the era is the Silver Bronx, which has the good sense to include half an egg white prior to shaking (as anything silver would imply). It works like a charm for those who would prefer their Bronx with a bit of froth; I would add another quarter ounce of sweet vermouth to recalibrate its balance.

## QUEENS

1 dash Regan’s Orange Bitters

2 wedges fresh pineapple (or ½ oz. pineapple juice, if unavailable)

1½ oz. Tanqueray No. Ten gin

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

Add bitters and one pineapple wedge to mixing glass and muddle briefly. Add remaining ingredients. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with one pineapple wedge.

The listed recipe calls for equal amounts of liquid ingredients, but I’ve opted to lean on the gin here for a bit of gas, as the bar staff at the newly opened Park Avenue Waldorf-Astoria did in the mid-twentieth century. Ted Saucier credited this cocktail to them, calling it a New Waldorf in Bottoms Up (1951). Some older recipes include a slice of orange in the muddling process, but it’s not necessary, as it pulls closer to the Bronx in flavor. This recipe bounced around some famous haunts but never made the transition to a classic cocktail. It’s a charming crowd-pleaser and another one that you can present to those who claim an aversion to gin. Ultimately, I think it was a failed attempt to attach a modified Bronx cocktail recipe to its sister borough. See Orange Blossom for variation and Thompson for a whiskey-based variation.

## SATAN’S WHISKERS  Classic

1 oz. Beefeater London dry gin

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

½ oz. Cointreau (Straight) or Grand Marnier (Curled) or Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao (Pencil) (see below)

1 oz. fresh orange juice

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6 (or Angostura bitters)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

Lastly, although not included in either of the Old Books, there is Satan’s Whiskers. First appearing in print in Harry Craddock’s The Savoy Cocktail Book (1930), this enhanced Bronx earns its inclusion here by taking the Bronx up one notch with the addition of an orange liqueur. According to Craddock, if you use Grand Marnier (or its like) you would have a Curled Whisker, and by using a triple sec (such as Cointreau) you would have a Straight Whisker. Each has its merits. Using Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao meets in the middle (I’ll go out on a limb here and call it the Pencil Whisker).

The original called for equal parts of all ingredients except for the orange element, which was taken down by half. Using today’s products, I feel it could use an adjustment, hence the methodology noted. I would also recommend using aromatic bitters in lieu of orange for a nice contrast. Try all variations and adjust to your personal taste; it’s one of those kinds of cocktails. See Marble Hill and Marmalade for variations.

## BROOKLYN  Classic

2 oz. Wild Turkey 101 rye whiskey

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Bigallet China-China Amer

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Though no representation of the classic Brooklyn cocktail exists in either edition of the Old Books, it does appear in Jacques Straub’s Drinks. It was a popular Manhattan variation in its day, and has recently enjoyed a comeback (it first appeared in print in 1908). An oft-used cocktail ingredient at the time was Amer Picon, which is no longer imported to the United States. Bigallet’s is a fine replacement (made since 1875). If you had to replicate without either, I would combine one-half portion each of orange bitters and Ramazzotti amaro, integrate, and use that. As for the vermouth, the original recipe in Jack’s Manual (1908) used sweet vermouth (and was also referred to as a Creole cocktail—not to be confused with the other namesake cocktail; see New Orleans). I prefer this one, as the dry vermouth gives it an identity and is not just a Martinez variation. Onetime Peacock Alley manager Orion Berge suggested a delicious autumnal variation, utilizing Laird’s bonded applejack in the rye spot (though a good calvados would make for a nice treat); we called it An Apple Tree Grows in Brooklyn. See Liberal for variation.

## BRUT

1½ oz. Foro extra dry organic vermouth

1½ oz. Cocchi Barolo Chinato or Bonal quinquina aperitif

1 dash Pacifique absinthe

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 15 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## BRUT (PEACOCK ALLEY VARIATION)

2 oz. Foro extra dry organic vermouth

½ oz. Calisaya liqueur

½ oz. Rittenhouse bonded rye whiskey

2 dashes Pernod Original Recipe absinthe

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

This cocktail, originally made with equal parts of quinquina and dry vermouth, is a fine predinner sipper when you’re in the mood for something lighter. In the process of working with these ingredients, I took the liberty of creating something with just a touch more alcohol. It’s better served as an aperitif cocktail with the vermouth taking the lead. Here, I have cut back on the quinquina and added a bit of Calisaya liqueur for some viscosity. I have also added some rye whiskey, which is included as an ingredient in a few other similarly named recipes of the era—and after inclusion, I found out why. Now it’s a quintessential predinner cocktail; a summer respite, for sure. For a cocktail in which a Calisaya takes the lead, see its own, self-titled entry. As for the first, lighter rendition, your ingredients should be prechilled, which makes for the shorter time on ice to avoid over-dilution.

## BUCK/RICKEY (Basic Recipe)

½ oz. fresh lime or lemon juice

2 oz. spirit of choice (brandy, bourbon, gin, rum, rye, Scotch, tequila, etc.)

4 oz. cane-based ginger ale or ginger beer (Boylan, Fever-Tree, or Q) or club soda

Squeeze citrus of choice into Collins glass and add shell (optional). Add ice. Add spirit and fill with ginger ale or ginger beer.

This classic refresher dates back to the mid-nineteenth century and there are plenty of variations. Buck is a category of drink, one in which the base ingredient can be exchanged for many a spirit, but the key is the citrus and ginger ale or ginger beer, which separates it from the rest of the Highballs. More often than not, I prefer the use of ginger beer. It probably more closely resembles the “imported ginger ale” called for in some of the old recipes, though a quality, cane syrup–based, domestic ginger ale works just fine in more subtle variations.

As for the choice of base spirit, use vodka, lime, and ginger beer and you’ll have the famous Moscow Mule; gin and lemon and the result is a Gin Buck. Gin and lime begets the Foghorn. Old Tom gin and lime begets the Marguerite (there also exists a cocktail version by the same name herein). Use bourbon and you have a Jim Renwick (for the architect of the same name). Use Scotch whisky and lime and you have a Mamie Taylor (named for the opera singer). Add a couple of dashes of absinthe to a Mamie Taylor and you’ll have the Robert E. Lee. The Old Waldorf-Astoria Bar Book features a Bacardi Buck, though I would recommend an aged variety for a richer drink. Probably the most popular of them all would be the Dark and Stormy, which uses Goslings Black Seal rum at its base, with lime juice and ginger beer. I modified that classic a bit to come up with the Stormy Monday. It adds a half ounce of Domaine de Canton ginger liqueur, which we infused directly in the bottle with fresh julienned ginger (you should do this anyway and just leave it on your shelf). You can sub in club soda for a more balanced result, but it works either way. It also takes nicely to a bit of freshly grated nutmeg as a “throwback” garnish. It’s definitely worth a try.

Rickeys are typically Bucks with club soda in lieu of ginger ale. With gin, lime, and club soda, you have the classic Gin Rickey (named for “Colonel” Joe Rickey, though in practice he preferred whiskey at the base of his—that’s called a Single Standard, by the way) and there is, of course, the Bacardi Rickey. If you use a Jamaican rum, you will then have a Rum Rickey. If you use sloe gin as the base, you will of course have the Sloe Gin Rickey. If you top it with a touch of grenadine, you’ll have what the Old Book called a Porto Rico. Use Scotch whisky and lime and a couple of dashes of aromatic bitters and you’ll be enjoying a Mamie Gilroy (named for the stage actress).

And finally, to confuse things a bit, there’s the Boston Cooler (which, with its inclusion of lemon juice, makes it a Buck). It includes Medford rum, a product that was indigenous to New England, went dormant for about a hundred years, and is now once again available; try the flavorful and rustic GrandTen Distilling’s version, or see if you can get your hands on Berkshire Mountain Distillers’ Ragged Mountain rum. If not, use any dark Appleton Estate rum, add a half ounce of fresh lemon juice and a touch of simple syrup and top with club soda. See Cooler and Mojito for variations.

## THE BUMBLED BEE  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. New York Distilling Company Ragtime Rye whiskey

¾ oz. Salers Gentiane aperitif

½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. house-made Honey Syrup

2 dashes Angostura bitters

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

This one represented the Waldorf Astoria as our 2015 entry in the annual Battle of the Bees charity event with other New York City businesses and restaurants that have beehives on their property. I used a local rye whiskey to keep with the local theme. To my palate, rye makes for a more balanced result (an entry-level Armagnac does the trick as well), though if you use bourbon, it may be a more winning crowd-pleaser. Do try all. This was originally conceived as a gin-based vehicle for the first harvest of our honey in 2013, and the First Night proved to be quite versatile. Simply omit the dry vermouth and Angostura bitters and add a full ounce of Salers and an additional ounce of freshly squeezed orange juice and finish with an orange peel twist. Best served as a refreshing rendition in the warmer months, with a London dry gin at its base.

## BUNYAN

2½ oz. Anchor Distilling Co. Junipero gin

Add to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with Queen Anne olive.

Let me introduce you to one of the first versions of what many now refer to as a Martini. This, the driest of all dry Martinis, contains no vermouth (or bitters) at all, which gives this its own identity. It was named for the popular folklore character of the early 1900s, Paul Bunyan (as you would have to be quite brawny to drink one). I advise adhering to the stirring time and making sure to use some ice to temper the gin and make it more palatable. Though not mentioned in the Old Books, the addition of a lemon twist here is fantastic. As per the original recipe, be sure to serve with a glass of chilled club soda on the side.

Other slightly enhanced but like-minded cocktails from the Old Books are the Holland Gin Cocktail (genever as the ingredient) and the Old Tom Gin Cocktail, both prepared as the Bunyan but including a dash or two of orange bitters. If you add a dash of Angostura bitters (along with the orange bitters) to the Old Tom version, you’ll have a version of the Turf cocktail (from Modern American Drinks, 1895). If you add orange bitters to the Bunyan, you are enjoying a Jockey Club. In addition, if you use Plymouth gin and add orange bitters, prepare that as in the recipe and top with two dashes of Angostura bitters, you’ll have the uniquely presented Howard cocktail. See Ruby for yet one more, slightly off-kilter variation.