The Waldorf Astoria Bar Book

## C

## CAFÉ KIRSCH

½ egg white

½ oz. Simple Syrup

1 oz. Lustau Solera Gran Reserva brandy

1 oz. Trimbach Grande Reserve kirsch cherry brandy

1 oz. French roast coffee, chilled

Add egg white and simple syrup to mixing glass. Dry-shake ice for 5 seconds. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass or small wineglass.

This is one of my favorite discoveries from the Old Books. A more complex yet perfectly balanced and enjoyable coffee cocktail—or for that matter, any cocktail—would be difficult to find. The sweet and spiced notes of the Solera brandy pair so well with the coffee and with the kirsch running a line right through it all, this drink leaves the palate dazzled. The airy body, thanks to the egg white, will have you looking forward to your second before your first is done. The other classic presentation omits the egg. Stir the remaining ingredients and then serve over crushed ice as an after-dinner drink. I would not turn that one down either. See Blackjack for variation.

## CAIPIRINHA  Classic

½ lime, quartered

1 tsp. demerara sugar or 2 demerara sugar cubes

2 oz. Avuá Amburana cachaça

Add lime and sugar to mixing glass. Muddle to release oils and juice from lime. Add cachaça and ice. Shake well and pour into Old Fashioned glass.

This Brazilian import is a summertime favorite and there’s a reason: it’s cold, tart, and sweet, with the limes and sugar pairing extremely well with the slightly rustic characteristic of cachaça. If you prefer, you can alternate a barrel-aged version, which lends some pretty complex notes to the flavor profile. This is highly recommended when you want to treat yourself to something out of the ordinary. One thing: I do not recommend substituting sugar syrup for the granular or cubed sugar. The abrasive quality of the sugar will get the most out of your limes. For best results, top with an ounce or so of chilled club soda that you used to rinse your mixing glass.

## CALISAYA

3 oz. Bonal quinquina aperitif or Calisaya liqueur (2 oz.)

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 15 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## GEORGE KAPPELER VARIATION

2 oz. Bulleit rye whiskey

1 oz. Cocchi Barolo Chinato quinquina aperitif or Calisaya liqueur

1 dash Angostura bitters (optional)

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into small cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

This cocktail, which was presented and served up, made for a simple predinner aperitif. You could also build it directly in an Old Fashioned glass, add ice and stir for a simple alternate take. Research led to George Kappeler’s Modern American Drinks (1895), in which he split the aromatized wine with rye whiskey for an off-center Manhattan alternate. After trying it in equal portions, I felt it was best served as a whiskey-forward cocktail, with rye whiskey propping up the foundation. Whether Joseph Taylor and the other bartenders transitioned the whiskey out of the recipe or they just served the aperitif neat may never be known. In any case, this cocktail is worth a try and will take to personal adjustments. See Arctic/Ardsley for more information on Calisaya and its like. See Riding Club for another variation of this entry.

## CAMPFIRE STORY  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. High West Campfire whiskey

½ oz. Bigallet China-China Amer

½ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao

1½ oz. fresh orange juice

Pinch Himalayan fine pink salt

Add all ingredients except salt to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Top with pinch of salt.

Amer Picon is no longer imported to the United States, but Bigallet China-China (made since 1872) is, and it makes this unique flavor profile possible. The High West Campfire is also a special product, a combination of corn, rye, and barley grains, and it incorporates the taste profiles of bourbon, rye, and Scotch whiskies. The inclusion of Ferrand dry curaçao adds to the complexity. Orange juice is often overlooked in modern cocktail recipes, but if it’s used in combination with the right partners, it adds not only a touch of acidity but brightness as well (for a boozier rendition and a version that allows the whiskey to shine, cut the orange juice by half an ounce).

## CHAMPAGNE COCKTAIL (Basic Recipe)

1 sugar cube

2 dashes Angostura bitters

5 oz. Laurent-Perrier brut Champagne nonvintage (Tours-sur-Marne)

Place sugar cube on small plate and douse with bitters. Place into Champagne flute, then fill flute with Champagne. Twist lemon peel to release oils, then discard.

One of the “big bang” cocktails, this indulgent sipper has lasted for a reason. It’s a splurge—an exercise in decadence and a fine treat. I would stop short of including vintage Champagne, and if a nonvintage remains out of the question (especially if you’re in a group setting), a refined, dry Spanish cava will do the trick.

If you use the recently rereleased Abbott’s bitters in the Angostura slot and an orange twist, you will have the Monopole, a favorite of Oscar Tschirky. I would also recommend trying the classic Death in the Afternoon, created by Ernest Hemingway, which is simply 1½ oz. absinthe (preferably from the freezer) and 4 oz. of Champagne. If you must, you may stray from Mr. Hemingway’s recipe by reducing the absinthe by a half an ounce, especially if planning on having more than one. A personal favorite.

## CHAMPAGNE COCKTAIL  Peacock Alley

1 oz. chilled Galliano liqueur infused with strawberries and pink peppercorns (recipe follows)

5 oz. Veuve Clicquot brut Champagne nonvintage (Reims)

Pour chilled, infused Galliano into Champagne flute. Fill with Champagne.

Galliano Infusion

1 lb. fresh, ripe strawberries (rinsed, cored, and halved)

1 750 ml. bottle Galliano

3 tbsp. pink peppercorns

Add ingredients to airtight, glass container and let infuse for 7 to 10 days. Fine-strain, then funnel back into bottle.

For this cocktail, created at our relaunching of Peacock Alley in 2005, I was inspired by some of the core flavors of former executive chef John Doherty’s favorite dishes. His inventive use of strawberries and peppercorns, in both savory and sweet dishes, was always a revelation and found a perfect pairing in the complex Galliano liqueur. Try with black peppercorns if your tastes run on the spicier side (these fill the role that bitters would in the classic version). This popular crowd-pleaser remains on our menu to this day.

## CHAMPAGNE COCKTAIL BY PHILIPPE OF THE WALDORF  Ted Saucier’s Bottoms Up

⅓ oz. green Chartreuse

¼ oz. Etter Zuger kirschwasser

4 oz. Drappier brut Champagne nonvintage (Reims)

Add champagne to flute or coupe. Add first two ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Slowly strain into flute or coupe.

This cocktail is from Ted Saucier’s Bottoms Up and he credits it to Claude C. Philippe, host of the Waldorf-Astoria. Philippe served as Oscar Tschirky’s assistant until Tschirky’s retirement in 1943. He took over the position of maître d’hôtel until 1959, and in some circles his colorful personality was nearly as popular.

The recipe originally called for the now-defunct Vieille Cure liqueur (there were two, probably made in the vein of Chartreuse, as there were both green and yellow varieties). The kirsch thins it out to surprisingly tasty results. Do try this unique offering.

## CLEOPATRA CHAMPAGNE COCKTAIL  Classic

4 oz. Gosset brut Champagne nonvintage (Ay)

¾ oz. Boulard Grand Solage VSOP calvados or Laird’s 7½ Year Old apple brandy (chilled)

¼ oz. Bénédictine

¼ oz. Grand Marnier

1 bar spoon (or ⅛ oz.) Campari

Add Champagne to flute or coupe. Add all other ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Slowly strain into prepared flute or coupe. Twist lemon peel to release oils, then discard.

This is a complex cocktail often attributed to the Old Hotel, though this recipe does not appear in either book. Either way, I can recommend trying this when looking for something special to celebrate with. It’s worth the trouble and inclusion of the high-tone ingredients.

## GARDENING AT NIGHT  Peacock Alley

4 oz. Sparkling Pointe Méthode Champenoise (North Fork)

¾ oz. Żubrówka bison grass vodka (chilled)

¾ oz. house-made Raspberry Shrub (chilled)

Add sparkling wine to flute or coupe. Add all other ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Slowly strain into prepared flute or coupe. Twist lemon peel to release oils, then discard.

Originally created for a Waldorf Astoria rooftop garden event, this summertime Champagne cocktail has become one of our most requested cocktails.

Easily made but deceptively complex, this will surely become one of your backyard staples. Expect to serve this year-round once your guests try it. You will probably be forced to give them this recipe, if only so they will stop arriving at your house every weekend expecting it in copious amounts. This can be easily scaled up and served as a Punch in a bowl for a larger gathering.

## ROOFTOP SUNSET  Peacock Alley

5 oz. Sparkling Pointe Méthode Champenoise (North Fork)

.75 oz. house-made Honey Syrup (chilled)

1 or 2 dashes Peychaud’s bitters

Add sparkling wine to flute or coupe. Add honey syrup to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Slowly strain into prepared Champagne flute or coupe. Carefully stab in the bitters. A pinkish cloud will form.

This cocktail was created for our inaugaural Battle of the Bees in 2013, an event in which the Hotel invites other NYC businesses that produce their own honey to a blind tasting with some of the city’s top chefs and culinary personalities. Proceeds go to local charities and everyone has a grand time. This easily made yet complex cocktail is best served outdoors, during long summer sunsets.

## SPRINGTIME  Peacock Alley

5 oz. Vranken Demoiselle brut rose Champagne nonvintage (Reims)

¾ oz. Esprit de June liqueur (chilled)

4 dashes house-made Cranberry Bitters

Add Champagne to flute or coupe. Add June liqueur and two dashes of cranberry bitters to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Strain into prepared Champagne flute or coupe. Top with two more dashes of cranberry bitters. Garnish with brandied cherry.

I created this cocktail spontaneously at my initial tasting of Esprit de June liqueur. Made from the vine flowers of several wine grapes, this clear and delicate liqueur pairs wonderfully with rose sparkling wine. Our house-made cranberry bitters add an important level of tannin that completes this treat.

## TUSCAN TERRACE  Peacock Alley

5 oz. Nino Franco Rustico prosecco (Valdobbiadene)

¾ oz. Tuaca liqueur (chilled)

⅓ oz. Allegrini grappa di Amarone

Add prosecco to flute or coupe. Add all other ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate and chill. Slowly strain into prepared Champagne flute or coupe. Garnish with brandied cherry.

Prior to the Cocktail Terrace’s physical removal for the restoration of the lobby’s landmark status specifications in 2012, this cocktail was created for the guests who preferred not to participate in the revered high tea service but wanted a midafternoon Champagne cocktail instead. It was quite the success and occasionally still gets requested by loyal guests.

## VELVET

5 oz. Nino Franco Rustico prosecco (Valdobbiadene)

2 oz. Guinness Irish stout

Add sparkling wine to small, chilled Bordeaux glass or large champagne flute. Using back of spoon, slowly pour the beer onto the spoon and down the side of glass to float.

Often called a Black Velvet, the Old Bar’s recipe denoted equal parts of both Champagne and stout and was presented in a large-format serving. This variation uses the slightly bitter stout to temper a fruit-forward sparkling wine. Using actual Champagne here is unnecessary, as it’s best saved for enjoying on its own merit. A nice  touch to a “black and white” party.

## CHANLER

2 oz. Ransom Old Tom gin or Hayman’s Old Tom gin

1 oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir briefly to integrate. Strain into Old Fashioned glass with two or three large ice cubes or sphere. Garnish with lemon peel.

Having the unique, barrel-aged Ransom Old Tom gin available made for a nice competition between the two styles. Both are fine cocktails, especially in summer, as this should be served on the rocks. Though the Old Books made not a mention of bitters, you can add a dash of your choice if you like, especially if using a less robust vermouth. As for the gin, I recommend the Hayman’s version before dinner and the Ransom after.

This offering is named for the artist Robert Winthrop Chanler, whose marriage to opera star Lina Cavalieri caused quite a stir in the newspapers of the day. “Sherriff Bob” was a regular at the Old Bar and as Johnnie Solan pointed out, “Bob knew all the Waldorf bartenders by their first names.” Please take a moment to investigate Mr. Chanler’s expressive art, especially his glassworks. See Astoria for variations.

## CHANTICLEER

1½ oz. house-made Orange Gin (recipe follows) or Hayman’s Old Tom gin

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

½ egg white

½ oz. Luxardo Triplum orange liqueur (optional, if not using orange gin)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Orange Gin

20 oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin

5 oz. Luxardo Triplum orange liqueur

1 peel of whole orange (with no pith)

3 whole cloves

Add all ingredients to airtight container and infuse for two weeks, stirring occasionally. Fine-strain and funnel back into bottle. Best used within 6 months.

This libation is named for the Cyrano de Bergerac writer Edmond Rostand’s 1910 play, Chantecler, a barnyard fable in which the main character, a rooster, believes his morning crowing causes the sun to rise. At the Old Bar, they served the cocktail garnished with an actual cock’s comb. The original recipe called for orange gin, a commercially available and popular orange-flavored, sweetened gin product of the time. Occasionally, one or two pop onto the market, but I wouldn’t recommend them. I’ve included an easy enough work-around that more than does the job.

Alex Nicol, founder of Spencerfield Spirit, in Edinburgh, Scotland, who began his career at Beefeater and Plymouth and now produces Edinburgh gin and many fine whiskies, confided in me that our approximation would be an accurate one. He offered that it is similar in profile “to one of the bestselling orange gins of the 1950s, Crabbie’s, as the recipe for orange was through infusion and not distilling.”

The Chanticleer can also be strained and topped with club soda as a Fizz for a fine summer refresher.

## CHARLIE CHAPLIN

1 oz. Rothman & Winter orchard apricot liqueur

1 oz. Plymouth sloe gin

1 oz. fresh lime juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## DOUGLAS FAIRBANKS

1½ oz. Plymouth gin

¾ oz. Rothman & Winter orchard apricot liqueur

¾ oz. lime juice

½ egg white

Add all ingredients to mixing glass and dry shake for five seconds. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## THREE-TO-ONE

2 oz. Portobello Road No. 171 London dry gin

1 oz. Combier Abricot apricot liqueur

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

2 dashes house-made Peach Bitters or The Bitter Truth Peach Bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

The original recipe for the Charlie Chaplin, named for the comedic star of early film, did not include gin of any sort. An adapted Peacock Alley Variation is occasionally featured on our cocktail list and is often requested by returning guests. The additional ounce of gin adds a bit of backbone and balances the sweeter notes, making for a nice alternative to the Cosmopolitan and our current signature Peacock cocktail.

The Douglas Fairbanks is another cocktail named for an actor and, along with the Dorothy Gish and the Mary Pickford, it finds its roots firmly planted in Havana, as Cuba was quite the getaway for celebrities of the era.

In the case of the Three-to-One, the addition of another stone fruit, peach bitters in this case, added the bit of zip that this recipe lacked, but orange bitters will certainly do the job. This can also be served to astounding success as a summertime Cooler, on the rocks and topped with a bit of club soda. Incidentally, this was named for the horse players who frequented the Old Bar. Apparently they preferred a favorite set of odds. Finally, if you replace the gin with tequila (a good blanco) in the Three-to-One, you will have the classic Toreador cocktail. Although not listed in the Old Books, it is another very rare tequila-based cocktail (and a fine Margarita alternate) from the first half of the twentieth century that was too good not to include. See Hop Toad for variation.

## CHARLIE ROSE

2 oz. Château de Montifaud VSOP cognac

Peel large swath or two of lemon and twist over rocks glass or tumbler. Rub peel on inside of rim, then discard. Add cognac. Garnish with a twist of lemon peel.

The printed recipe clearly stated “no ice” with just a lone twist of lemon to adorn a pony glass of brandy. What fun is that? Now that this old-timer is seeing the light of day again, we may as well push its original intention to the limit. Though no tangible information remains regarding its origin, I imagine some perennial patron of the Old Bar called this his own.

## CHAUNCEY

¾ oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin

¾ oz. Russell’s Reserve 6 Year Old rye whiskey (or Maker’s Mark bourbon whiskey)

¾ oz. Pierre Ferrand 1840 cognac

¾ oz. Dolin de Chambery sweet vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel (orange peel, for bourbon version).

As Mr. Crockett alluded to, this complex cocktail, apparently named for a regular, “a famous orator and wit,” should find a resurgence. This is the complete original recipe, spirit-wise, except for the inclusion of bourbon as an alternative to spicier rye whiskey. Comparing both versions, the wheated, sweeter bourbon really made for a palate-coating mouthfeel and had a longer finish to boot. Either way, it’s a winner, but it’s up to your personal taste (and that’s one of the things that makes this a great cocktail).

I poured a lot of whiskey down the sink experimenting with different gins and brandies before finally settling here. If you’re looking to jazz it up a bit more, use the venerable Carpano Antica in the sweet vermouth slot, and it all still holds up (especially in the rye version, which boasts a toasted marshmallow finish).

Though not included in the original recipe, the citrus twist is essential. Sometime in the 1940s, a published rendition of this cocktail pulled back on the vermouth and cognac, allowing the gin to take the lead and resulting in a crowd-pleasing, if less complex, cocktail. It may have been popular, but it’s not a Chauncey.

## CHICAGO  Classic

2 oz. Frapin VSOP cognac

½ oz. Cointreau

2 dashes Angostura bitters

1½ oz. Laurent-Perrier brut NV Champagne

Prepare the glass by rubbing a lemon wedge around one half of chilled cocktail glass and about ½ inch down. Then roll the moistened half in superfine sugar. Add all ingredients except champagne to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into prepared cocktail glass. Top with Champagne.

I find it hard to believe that this era-appropriate classic did not see time at the Old Bar. It is an elegant and “imperial” (so called because of the added Champagne) Brandy Cocktail and it should be poised for a comeback any day now. Enjoy with your favorite dry cava if you prefer your Champagne unaccompanied.

## CHICAGO FIZZ

2 oz. chilled club soda

½ egg white

½ oz. Simple Syrup

1 oz. Smith & Cross navy-strength rum

1 oz. Graham’s ruby port

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add egg white and simple syrup to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into Fizz glass. Stir briefly with bar spoon to integrate.

This cocktail reportedly made its way over from the Windy City, becoming a favorite at the Old Bar. It’s pretty much taken as is from the Old Books, except for the use of navy-strength rum standing in for a standard Jamaican rum. I figured that if you are only using one ounce of spirit, the recipe can take the bump. And it does, wonderfully so.

## CHINESE

2 oz. Appleton Estate 12 Year Old Rum (1 oz. each of cognac and aged rhum agricole)

¼ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur (or Crème de Noyaux)

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine (or Simple Syrup)

2 dashes Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry and lemon peel (twisted and discarded).

A version of this cocktail dates back to the late nineteenth century and is first found in a French cocktail book, Bariana, by Louis Fouquet, published in 1896. It must’ve been quite popular, as it finds its way into most of the major books of the early twentieth century. The Old Books forgo the use of simple syrup and crème de noyaux (almond liqueur), which some recipes include, but adds maraschino and grenadine instead. It works either way—just don’t use them all at once. If adapting the French variation and you don’t have crème de noyaux handy, amaretto or even orgeat syrup work fine here. You can also split the lead spirit between an aged rhum agricole and cognac as the original recipe did. In any case, going generally light on the liqueurs makes for a much more pleasant drink, which leads me to believe that this archival cocktail may be another on the verge of making a comeback.

## CHOCOLATE

1¼ oz. yellow Chartreuse

1¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

1 egg yolk

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into small cocktail wineglass. No garnish.

## CHOCOLATE (SAVOY ADAPTATION)

1½ oz. Graham’s 10 Year tawny port

¾ oz. yellow Chartreuse

¾ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

¾ oz. chocolate mix (see below)

1 egg yolk

PREPARATION NO. 1:

Add 1 heaping teaspoon Ghirardelli unsweetened cocoa powder to measuring cup or glass. Add 1 oz. water. Mix with spoon to combine. Yield is for two cocktails. As an alternate, you can just use chilled Hot (Cold) Cocoa Mix.

PREPARATION NO. 2:

Add all ingredients to separate mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with grated nutmeg.

First found in print in Christopher Lawlor’s The Mixicologist (1895), which called for equal amounts of yellow Chartreuse and maraschino liqueur along with a whole egg, it is a wonder how this became associated with anything chocolate in the first place. As you’ll see, the same could also be said of the Coffee Cocktail. The Old Books version is practically identical to the 1895 version except the whole egg was reduced to just the yolk portion, which is preferable. Interestingly, other ingredients found in Chocolate drinks of the era range from port wine (most mentioned) to blackberry brandy (least), along with, get this: chocolate powder!

I have included an adaptation of the two Savoy Cocktail Book offerings for the recipe simply because it took the original and modified by adding actual cocoa. One rendition added cocoa powder and the other took that and swapped the maraschino for port wine. I am pretty sure they used a ruby port, but I liked the more complex tawny here. Either way, it’s a time-machine, after-dinner Flip that you can wow your guests with. Just be sure to double-strain to remove any ice chips. See Flip for variations.

## CHOCOLATINI  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. Van Gogh Dutch chocolate vodka

½ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao (or Grand Marnier liqueur)

2 oz. chilled house-made Hot (Cold) Cocoa Mix

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with dark chocolate curls or shavings.

Although given a bad name of late, “dessert” cocktails do have their place. Made with care and quality ingredients, they can be surprisingly complex. This is one of our most popular post-theater cocktails; the chocolate ganache, made by our heralded pastry kitchen, brings a luxurious viscosity to this dessert-in-a-glass. As for the name, the staff and I kept kiddingly referring to this offering as the Chocolatini as we developed it and promised to arrive at a better name. It never happened. The menus had to be printed and I let the first round go out like that. It has remained ever since, and I don’t care. It’s another cocktail that simply cannot be removed from the cocktail list at Peacock Alley, It’s quite possibly the best spiked liquid dessert on the planet.

## CHOCOLATE CREAM PHOSPHATE FIZZ

2 oz. chilled club soda

1 egg yolk

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

1½ oz. Etter Zuger kirsch cherry brandy

1 oz. heavy cream

3 dashes Horsford’s acid phosphate

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add egg yolk and simple syrup to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into Fizz glass. Stir briefly with bar spoon to integrate.

Although quite the mouthful title-wise, this is aesthetically similar to the Chocolate, as it also does not contain any of its namesake ingredients. Another notable aspect of this cocktail is the appearance of the once-popular acid phosphate. This liquid ingredient is added to impart a sour note, as would result if you used citrus, but without the flavor of it. Use sparingly; a little goes a long way, though you will find plenty of uses for it both within this book and outside it.

As for this rare recipe, a nonalcoholic, creamless Egg Cream (with actual chocolate syrup, acid phosphate, and soda water) would be the standard fountain offering. Whether or not Mr. Crockett managed to misinterpret the entry for this one will probably never be known, as a correlating recipe could not be found. Nevertheless, it’s quite satisfying and retains its relation to the Chocolate.

## CHOCOLATE SOLDIER

1½ oz. Plymouth gin or Nicholson London dry gin

1½ oz. Bonal Quinquina aperitif or Dubonnet

¼ oz. fresh lime juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

As was the tradition of the day, this was named for the successful Broadway production that debuted in 1909. The original recipe called for a 2:1 ratio of gin to Dubonnet, but the winey taste profile of the current version of the aperitif was unbalanced, so I substituted Bonal, which is probably more in line with the originally intended taste profile of Dubonnet anyway.

Now produced in New Zealand from the original recipe, Nicholson London dry gin appeared quite often in the Old Books. Its flavor profile is less herbal than a traditional London dry and takes to mixing quite well. Finally, I distributed the amounts of ingredients evenly and stirred it despite the inclusion of juice. Citrus, when used in a small amount, takes the place of bitters as an enhancement and when stirred, it maintains a more leaden mouthfeel, retaining the recipe’s intended complexity. It’s worthy of a resurgence, for sure.

## CINFUL  Peacock Alley

1 oz. Schönauer Apfel liqueur

¾ oz. Appleton Estate Reserve rum

¾ oz. house-made Cinnamon Vodka

¾ oz. fresh apple cider

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice

2 dashes Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg and dried apple slice.

## PIE ON THE SILL  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. Laird’s bonded applejack

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. house-made Demerara Syrup

½ oz. house-made Cinnamon Vodka

1 dash Angostura bitters

2 heaping bar spoons house-made Apple Compote (recipe follows) or

1 heaping bar spoon Medford Farms apple butter

(If using apple butter with sugar added, omit Demerara Syrup)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg and house-made Dried Apple Chip.

Apple Compote

1 c. water

¼ c. demerara sugar

½ vanilla bean, split in half lengthwise

2 oz. Laird’s bonded applejack

⅛ tsp. ground cinnamon

⅛ tsp. ground cloves

⅛ tsp. ground nutmeg

2 oz. fresh lemon juice

1 pinch salt

4 large Golden Delicious apples (or other sweet apple), cored and cubed

In a saucepan, combine all ingredients except apples and bring to a boil. Simmer until the sugar is dissolved and the mixture thickens slightly, about 5 minutes. Add the apples and return to a boil. Lower the heat and simmer, stirring occasionally, until the apples are very tender and the mixture thickens, about 30 minutes.

Remove from heat and remove the vanilla bean pods. Let cool to room temperature before serving (mixture will thicken as it cools). Place in plastic container and refrigerate for later use.

The Cinful is a seasonal favorite of our guests, and is requested as soon as the weather turns cooler. The Jamaican rum adds a nice contrast to the fruit and spice components. This is certainly one you will find yourself preparing annually from Halloween through the end of the year.

Pie on the Sill is another autumnal specialty and can be made successfully using either the apple compote or the apple butter. There are many uses for the homemade apple compote (I like mine in warm oatmeal), so don’t be concerned about preparing it, it will be used.

## CLARET PUNCH (Claret Cup)

3 oz. dry red wine of choice (Bordeaux Supérieur is recommended)

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

⅓ oz. Simple Syrup

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add large ice cubes and roll from mixing glass to shaker 3 or 4 times. Pour into chilled goblet or Hoffman House glass (a Collins glass works as well). Garnish with citrus wheels.

This one goes back to old England and was one of the most popular drinks up until the time of the Old Waldorf-Astoria. The most ancient recipes include only slices of lemon, but I went with the evolved recipe of the Old Bar. Obviously granulated sugar would have been used but the syrup integrates easier. A simple preparation that can be served on long afternoons in a large format as well. It is sure to become another new favorite. See Sangaree for variations.

## CLIQUET

1½ oz. Jim Beam rye

½ oz. Cruzan aged dark rum

2 oz. fresh orange juice

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to Old Fashioned glass. Add large ice cubes and stir briefly to integrate. Garnish with orange wheel.

This indigenous creation of the Old Bar can be thought of as a “whiskey Screwdriver.” You can substitute bourbon for the rye, if you choose. The original recipe called for dashes of St. Croix rum, hence the Cruzan, though I’ve taken the liberty of adding just enough to make it noticeable. Please take note that lower-proof whiskey works best here, as you will most likely be having more than one. As previously mentioned, there is no substitute for fresh juice.

Named for the writers of the old New York Herald newspaper who frequented the Old Bar, it was also listed in Old Waldorf Bar Days as the Herald Punch; just add a half ounce of demerara syrup, sub Wild Turkey 101 rye (or other overproof whiskey) in the whiskey slot, and shake and strain onto fresh ice, and that’s what you will have.

## CLOVER CLUB

½ egg white

½ oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

2 oz. Bombay London dry gin

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Carpano dry vermouth (optional)

Add egg white and syrup to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add remaining ingredients and ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Twist lemon peel over drink, then discard. Garnish with one fresh raspberry on skewer.

This recently resuscitated number originated at the old Bellevue-Stratford Hotel, in Philadelphia, where the high-society Clover Club held its meetings. It was the hotel’s manager, George C. Boldt, who went on to become the first owner/operator of the Waldorf, and it’s a good bet that he was the one responsible for this cocktail’s appearance in the Old Bar in the first place. It’s also perfect for guests who claim an aversion to gin. The first printed recipe (1909) included dry vermouth and I can certainly recommend trying this version, as it adds a discernible depth and length of flavor. The recipe here represents a modern take on the Old Bar recipe. Feel free to pull back a half ounce of gin if you’re having more than one.

The famed poet William Butler Yeats certainly had more than one when he was served a Clover Club at a luncheon in his honor. Mr. Crockett noted he enjoyed them “all the way through his meal.” I always appreciated Yeats’s quote: “The problem with some people is that when they aren’t drunk, they’re sober.”

Jacques Straub’s Drinks (1914) utilizes Old Tom gin and lime juice, along with grenadine as the sweetener for the Sunshine. Just be sure to include the dry vermouth. A slight deviation that deserves a try. A September Morn No. 2 replaces the gin with a flavorful white rum. Plantation 3 Stars or Caña Brava work well here. A Cuban Clover Club subs lime juice for the lemon and also utilizes white rum.

This recipe, listed in the text portion of Old Waldorf Bar Days, is recalled as a Christ cocktail (not to be confused with the Christ, a Martini variation of the same name; see Martini). Whether it was an editing error or confusion on the part of Mr. Crockett will never be known, but he did cleverly believe that the name of that drink came from a guest who wanted something spiritual but settled for something spirituous. I think that his theory still fits this satisfying survivor, regardless of the title.

## GLOOM LIFTER

1½ oz. Bushmills Irish whiskey

½ oz. Cardenal Mendoza Solera Gran Reserva brandy

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

¼ oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

½ egg white

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

This whiskey take on the Clover Club makes for an interesting alternative and takes to tinkering pretty well. I settled on Spanish brandy (the original recipe called for “one-half teaspoon”); its spicy yet musty profile made itself known without the need to add more. If using a cognac, you may split the starring role with the Irish whiskey. Handing over the sweet spot to either syrup makes for a nice alternative as well.

This cocktail is listed as the Waldorf Gloom Lifter in The Old Waldorf-Astoria Bar Book.

## CORA MIDDLETON

1½ oz. Appleton Estate Extra rum

½ oz. Bols genever

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. house-made Grenadine

½ egg white

5 drops Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients except bitters to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Top with drops of bitters and twist orange peel to release oils, then discard.

Yet another variation on the Clover Club, the rum-based Cora Middleton made its debut at the Old Bar. I prefer using house-made grenadine as the sugar component to give it a separate identity from the parent cocktail. Other recipes of the day sub in lime juice in the lemon spot. Feel free to try that if you’d like.

For a Repeal Day event a few years ago, the theme was twists on obscure cocktails, and Cora’s Daughter was born. Place a flavorful and slightly smoky blended Scotch whisky in the rum slot (I like Spencerfield Spirit “Pig’s Nose” or Black Grouse) and use Peychaud’s bitters instead of orange for the garnish. Though chaotic on paper, all of the ingredients are quite harmonious. I like this one a lot.

## CLUB COCKTAIL NO. 2  William Schmidt version

2 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¼ oz. green Chartreuse

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

The Old Bar version of this cocktail uses a couple of dashes of Angostura bitters in lieu of green Chartreuse for a “spiced” Martini. It’s a fine rendition, but I’ve opted to list this recipe in its standard form. It first materializes in William Schmidt’s The Flowing Bowl (1891). I adapted it to let the green Chartreuse define what the cocktail could be and separated it from the pack. Its luxurious finish surprised both my wife and me with its complexity. Try both. See Martini for Club Cocktail.

## COBBLER (Basic Recipe)

2½ oz. spirit of choice or

4 oz. wine or sherry of choice

½ oz. Simple Syrup (or 1 tsp. superfine sugar, for traditional method)

2 orange and lemon wheels

TRADITIONAL PREPARATION:

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Pour unstrained into a tumbler or Collins glass. Garnish with additional citrus wheels and seasonal berries and fruit. Serve with metal straw.

MODERN PREPARATION:

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into goblet or Hoffman House goblet filled with crushed or pellet ice. Garnish with additional citrus wheels and seasonal berries and fruit. Serve with metal straw.

By the time the Old Bar was at its peak of popularity, the Cobbler had already seen its best days, though based on the number of recipes in the Old Books, it was more than holding its own. It was the first to feature a straw (a new invention of the mid-nineteenth century), and it freely exploited the availability of ice (also a new amenity at that time). Variations mostly consisted of wine or liquor, which was another source of popularity. This recipe got the job done.

The first appearance in The Old Waldorf Bar Book is the Brandy Cobbler. This strong sipper included a couple of dashes of maraschino. You may even want to substitute the maraschino for the simple syrup entirely, There is the Claret Cobbler, which utilizes your favorite dry red wine. The oldest and most popular of all is the Sherry Cobbler. I recommend an amontillado or oloroso sherry, as it is flavorful enough to take the sugar and fruit while still retaining its identity. Please adjust sugar accordingly if using a bone-dry fino. If going with a port or a Pedro Ximénez, the sweetest sherry, pull back on the sugar, or better yet, omit it entirely.

As for the whole shake-and-strain thing, traditionally the barman would shake this in preparation and serve as is, unstrained. I find this rustic and visually unappealing; I prefer to strain it into a goblet with fresh pellet ice. Then I add fresh fruit for garnish prior to serving.

Although the Cobbler is traditionally served in a thick water-type tumbler, I think it’s best served in something slightly fancier. Hoffman House goblets work well here. The origin of these large goblets can be traced back to the famous but now extinct Hoffman House Hotel, on Broadway and Twenty-fifth Street in NYC (which, by the way, had its own influential bar books). See Julep/Smash, Peachy Peacock Cobbler and Tea Cobbler for variations.

## (WHISKEY) COCKTAIL (Basic Recipe)

2½ oz. spirit of choice (bourbon, brandy, gin [genever, Old Tom], rum, rye, Scotch, etc.)

¼ oz. Simple Syrup or Gum Syrup

2 dashes bitters of choice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon or orange peel.

So here you have another genre of drink—one, that like the Buck or Sling, is identified by its base ingredient. That’s also how it would have been called for in its day (“I’ll have a Whiskey Cocktail”). The recipe remains the same, though over time, other modifications, or “improvements,” such as curaçao, maraschino liqueur, and absinthe, were added for variety. This is the recipe that represents your Old Fashioned.

As for the bitters, everything works here. The Bitter Truth produces one based on Jerry Thomas’s recipe that pairs extremely well with all of the gin variations. If you are a tequila lover, chocolate bitters would make a reposado tequila version shine.

As for the twist, it’s essential. I lean toward lemon in most, but orange does brighten things up a bit and pairs exceptionally well with bourbon (and tequila). As always, it’s your call.

This Cocktail entry is not to be confused with anything called a “Martini.” For a modern definition, I’ll let the addition of vermouth be the identifying ingredient there.

The original recipe in both Old Books (as well as Oscar’s) all mistakenly list “dash of gin” in lieu of “dash of gum” (a recurring misinterpretation of Mr. Crockett’s). Have no fear, I have tried it with gin and the appropriate intention is listed here.

The Old Books also include a recipe that omits sugar (don’t) and uses rye whiskey as the base ingredient. If you go that route, you are enjoying a Ewing cocktail. See Old Fashioned for variations.

## COFFEE COCKTAIL

1 whole egg

1 tsp. superfine sugar

2 oz. Quinta de Noval 10 Year Old tawny port

1 oz. Lustau Solera Gran Reserva brandy

Add egg and sugar to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg.

The intriguingly obvious missing component of this drink (which is technically a Flip and not a cocktail) is its namesake. It does date back to the mid-nineteenth century and probably got its name from those who drank it in lieu of coffee as a morning-after cure-all. Although no preference is noted in the Old Books, other recipes of the era (of which there are many in print) call for ruby-style port when one is being used. Younger, sweeter, and more winey than its brother tawny port, it definitely brings those characteristics to the show. I personally prefer the tawny port here, as it blends more harmoniously with the excellent Spanish brandy from one of Spain’s finest sherry houses.

In an effort to be era-appropriate, I prefer the use of actual granulated sugar for this old-timer, though you can use syrup if you like. Go easy on the nutmeg; a little goes a long way. The double-strain is essential for a smooth trip across the palate. For a version that actually contains coffee, see Espresso Cocktail. See Flip for variations.

## COLE PORTER  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. Willett Family Estate straight rye whiskey

1 oz. Lustau Don Nuño oloroso sherry

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

¼ egg white

Add all ingredients to mixing glass and dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Fine-strain into Collins glass filled with fresh ice cubes. Garnish with orange peel and brandied cherry.

This charmingly enhanced Whiskey Sour was created to celebrate one of the hotel’s most notable past residents, whose piano our guests have the pleasure of listening to every evening at Peacock Alley. I imagine Mr. Porter ordering a couple of these up to his room, maybe on the verge of his next big hit. It’s the top!

## COLLINS (Basic Recipe)

2 oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

2 oz. chilled club soda

Add all ingredients except club soda to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Collins glass filled with large ice cubes. Top with chilled club soda and stir briefly to integrate. Garnish with brandied cherry and/or citrus peel or slice (optional).

First served by John Collins (famous for his gin Punch) at London’s Limmer’s Hotel in the early nineteenth century, this “big bang” concoction made it to the United States in time to be included in Jerry Thomas’s 1876 edition of The Bartenders Guide. A number of renditions are included in the Old books and the recipe’s adaptability must’ve been a boon to the boys behind the Waldorf bar. Variations of this recipe abound, namely the listed Fizz. In fact, they have identical ingredients; what separates the two is the way in which they are served. A Collins is served on ice, while a Fizz is strained into a smaller glass, meant to be consumed more quickly. There is also room for garnish in a Collins, whereas the Fizz does not have any. This is another instance in which our prebatched fresh Sour Mix would be used when preparing for a group of guests (see “House-Made Recipes” chapter).

As for the drink itself, it is a victim of what is probably one of the most famous examples of the game of “telephone” the world has ever known: how the recipe listed here became the Tom Collins, as opposed to the correctly named John Collins. John Collins did get a version, using genever at its base, named after him. There is also a Brandy Collins, in which I’d use a VS cognac at its foundation. The Durkee (named for the sandwich condiment family) incorporates Jamaican rum. The apparently popular Bacardi Collins obviously uses rum at its root, but substitutes lime in the juice slot. I would do the same if going the tequila route, if that is your fancy. In recent times, making a John Collins often means using a whiskey base, which is also fine. Included in the Old Books is a Fin de Siècle (Sour), which incorporates grenadine and/or raspberry syrup in lieu of simple syrup with the standard gin base. It’s a fine alternate.

I would add another ounce of club soda if having more than one, but that’s just me. This classic’s elasticity lends itself to any base spirit, which is probably the main reason it has survived the ages. Though I personally would never succumb to vodka; that would just be lazy.

## COMMODORE (Cocktail Adaptation)  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Diplomático Blanco Reserve rum

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

¼ oz. house-made Raspberry Syrup

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and brandied cherry.

According to opening Waldorf-Astoria bartender Johnnie Solan, this was named for a ranking officer of a local yacht club. For the cocktail variation, I made an effort to give these ingredients their own identity. The small amount of lemon juice makes this cocktail unique and is what led me to believe that this was another example in which the juice component was meant as an enhancement and not a full-on ingredient. I also omitted the “white of one egg” and the added white sugar. This somewhat adventurous reading, with added bitters and prepared by stirring, resulted in this simple but satisfying summer sipper. Following the directions of the Old Books to the letter left me with a pretty bland, rum-based Clover Club derivative, which already exists anyway. If you must try it for yourself, just add half of an egg white and a quarter ounce of simple syrup to the listed recipe and shake very well. Do yourself a favor and leave in the bitters, or even add another dash. They do help out immensely.

## COMMODORE NO. 2

1½ oz. Basil Hayden’s bourbon

1 oz. Tempus Fugit crème de cacao

¾ oz. fresh lemon juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and brandied cherry.

This creation of the Old Bar originally called for equal portions of all ingredients (excluding grenadine), but I’ve made the whiskey take the lead here. It props up the rest of the cocktail along with the complex cocoa liqueur. You can use this recipe, with its uncommon combination of ingredients, to surprise and satisfy your guests.

## COOLER/HIGHBALL (Basic Recipe)

2 oz. spirit of choice (brandy, bourbon, gin, rum, rye, Scotch, tequila, etc.)

4 oz. club soda, ginger ale or ginger beer, tonic, etc.

Add spirit of choice to Collins glass. Add large ice cubes and fill with ginger ale or other carbonated option. Stir briefly to integrate and serve.

Pulling back on the amount of citrus (if any) to a squeeze of a wedge (to separate it from the more citrus-forward Buck or Rickey), these tall drinks, meant for enjoyment on a hot summer day but great anytime, are as versatile as it gets. I would not get too tied up as to the difference between a Cooler and a Highball—it traditionally rested on the amount of ice used, with the cooler containing more. These days, the difference probably lies in the use of an aromatic wine in a Cooler, resulting in a lower-proof beverage, though traditional versions, such as those found in the Old Books, show no such disparity.

Some notable Coolers referred to in the Old Books include the Bacardi Cooler, which was made with white rum and ginger ale and garnished with a bit of fresh mint. Another is the Hilly Croft, which includes Old Tom gin, ginger ale, and a lemon twist. Make this with club soda and it becomes a Remsen Cooler. The Seawanhaka Yacht Club is made with rye whiskey, ginger ale, and a lemon twist. A Narragansett includes bourbon, ginger ale, and an orange wedge. Substitute rye whiskey and you have the Hawaii and quite outrageously, a Klondike as well. Also name-checked in the Old Books are the Brandy and Ginger Ale Frappé (prepared like the Cooler, served with an orange peel for garnish) and Brandy and Soda (do the same). The Jamaica Highball is prepared with Jamaican dark rum and club soda. An orange twist here is glorious.

Both 100 Famous Cocktails and Bottoms Up credit the Starlight Roof Garden Cooler to the “New Waldorf-Astoria.” It’s simply a dry vermouth Cooler enhanced by a sugar cube doused with Angostura bitters and a touch of lime juice, topped with ginger ale. Enjoyable for those who prefer things on the drier side.

The Highball hails from England, where they thoroughly enjoy their Scotch and sodas. The name’s origin, though, is a different story, and breaking from my usual response when it comes to these matters, I’m willing to go with almost all of them here.

For one, New York City–based, UK-born barman Patrick Gavin Duffy (The Official Mixer’s Manual) is credited with the naming of the genre, though it did not see print until 1934. What actual Highball he named it after falls into three categories: The first was the railroad analogy, likening the “lump of ice” to the boiler pressure gauge on the steam engines of the day. When it reached optimum capacity it was considered “highballing.” The second is baseball based, and of course most likely pairs itself to the “chin music” pitch, in which the pitcher throws high and inside to the batter in an effort to back him off the plate. He would be “highballing.” The third, and the one I believe works best, is the simple, old-school moniker for a whiskey shot, otherwise known as a “ball”; and when served in a Collins-type glass, with a “lump of ice” and club soda, it was a “high ball.”

To me, what separates a Highball from a Buck or Rickey is its sheer simplicity. It’s just spirit and soda, maybe a twist or wedge, and that’s it—anything more and you technically have something else. But at the end of the day it really doesn’t matter; they are all simple spirits with mixers served on ice in a tall glass.

One recommendation I’d like to make is to stay adventurous and use these types of drinks as opportunities to sample base spirits that you would usually try to avoid. They may provide the entry to expanding your palate. See Buck/Rickey for variations.

## COOPERSTOWN (Adapted Waldorf Astoria Version)

1½ oz. Tanqueray London dry gin

½ oz. Dolin de Chambery sweet vermouth

½ oz. Dolin de Chambery dry vermouth

1 oz. fresh orange juice

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6 (optional)

12 fresh mint leaves

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## I.D.K. NO. 2 (IMPROVED)

2½ oz. Plymouth gin (or Nicholson London dry gin)

½ oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

12 mint leaves

3 dashes house-made Chocolate Bitters or Fee Brothers Aztec chocolate bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel (optional).

## HUGO ENSSLIN VERSION

1 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Dolin de Chambery sweet vermouth

1 oz. Dolin de Chambery dry vermouth

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

8 fresh mint leaves

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel (optional).

The Old Bar entry for the Cooperstown is dedicated to one Craig Wadsworth and the “young sportsmen” from “the richest and prettiest town up-State.” The recipe’s simple direction: “Bronx, with Mint.” The adapted recipe here is exactly that: our Bronx, with mint.

The I.D.K. No. 2 is a mint-enhanced, spirit-forward rendition, which, when developed, fell far short of expectations. The original recipe is simply 4:1 gin to sweet vermouth with a “sprig of mint.” This improved version gives each ingredient a reason for being there. Both of these recipes originally called for Nicholson London dry gin, which is currently being produced in New Zealand. It is lighter in style but Plymouth will stand in just fine.

Carpano Antica or other full-flavored vermouth is essential in order to keep the original heady intention intact. The chocolate bitters bring a nice complexity and natural partner to the mint, but if it’s unavailable, any aromatic bitters will do. Now it’s an adult mint chocolate–tinged cocktail served up, which makes it the first of its distinctive kind. See Baco for I.D.K.

A similar recipe under the title of Cooperstown that also omits the orange juice can be found in Tom Bullock’s The Ideal Bartender; just use a 2:1 ratio of Old Tom gin to sweet vermouth and orange bitters (along with the mint) for a lighter and sweeter rendition.

Hugo Ensslin, whose 1917 Recipes for Mixed Drinks was, along with The Ideal Bartender, one of the last cocktail books published prior to Prohibition. Ensslin’s equal-measure variant is a tasty, lower-proof cocktail. It’s just enough to easily make it through the seventh-inning stretch.

Finally, from just prior to the release of the Old Books, Harry MacElhone’s Barflies and Cocktails (1927) included a dry version. The original called for gin; I’m going to assume a London dry. You can go that route, but the Old Tom gin added some extra body and a slightly sweet back note while still allowing this to land firmly in the dry camp. Just sub in dry vermouth for the sweet in Tom Bullock’s version and you’ll have the one that Harry served in his New York Bar in Paris.

All of these cocktails are best when your mint is in season. I also think the orange twist is an essential component for each of them, but I will leave the pairing with mint to your personal preference. See Bronx for variation.

## CORONATION

1 oz. Laird’s bonded applejack or Boulard Grand Solage VSOP calvados

1 oz. Noilly Prat sweet vermouth

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Marie Brizard Apry apricot liqueur

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

The first known rendition is from Jacques Straub’s Drinks (1914) and is simply equal parts London dry gin, dry vermouth, and Dubonnet (nothing to write home about there). The other of note is from the Savoy book (1930) and is an improvement with equal parts oloroso sherry and dry vermouth, enhanced with dashes of maraschino liqueur and orange bitters. This one, served at the Old Bar, was named in honor of the 1911 ceremony of King George V. I attempted a version that ramped up the applejack to Manhattan proportions, but this original outshone it. Calvados can be substituted for the Laird’s, of course. Either way, this is sure to become one of your autumn staples.

The Cuban Coronation is an alternate that switched out the applejack for rum, subbed in Dubonnet for the sweet vermouth, and omitted the apricot liqueur. After much testing and tasting, I came to the conclusion the Cuban Coronation would be best served in the same manner as the original here, only substituting a dark, flavorful rum of your choice for the applejack.

## CORPSE REVIVER NO. 1  Classic

1½ oz. Courvoisier VSOP cognac

¾ oz. Boulard Grand Solage VSOP calvados

¾ oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

1 dash Regan’s Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## CORPSE REVIVER NO. 2  Classic

1 oz. Tanqueray No. Ten gin

1 oz. Cocchi Americano

1 oz. Cointreau

1 oz. fresh lemon juice

2 dashes Pernod Original Recipe absinthe

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

Though neither of these cocktails appear in the Old Books, the No. 2 has regained its popularity and is often requested at Peacock Alley. Rest assured, the Corpse Reviver No. 1 makes for a terrible “eye opener,” but it is one heck of a post-dinner Manhattan alternate.

The popular—and more worthy of its name—No. 2 is the appropriate noontime crowd-pleaser. We use Cocchi Americano in lieu of the originally called-for Lillet, as the Cocchi’s bittersweet profile is more in line with the classic Kina Lillet, which would have been used at the time of this cocktail’s origin but is no longer produced. It’s a classic for a reason. And yes, I did not “rinse” the glass with absinthe as usually called for. I think that its inclusion makes for a finer drink. I also personally prefer to cut the Cointreau by half, but that’s just me.

## COSMOPOLITAN  Classic

2 oz. Absolut Citron vodka

1 oz. Combier Liqueur d’Orange

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. Northland cranberry Juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

This classic 1980s NYC survivor was still going strong when we reopened Peacock Alley in 2005. It was so popular that we decided to model our new signature cocktail on it, and The Peacock was born. Please do your best to secure the more natural-flavored Northland brand of cranberry Juice. It makes a discernible difference. See The Peacock for variation.

## COUNTRY CLUB

1½ oz. Plantation 3 Stars white rum

1 oz. Sacred extra dry vermouth

½ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## FLAPPER

1½ oz. Appleton Estate Reserve rum

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

½ oz. house-made Demerara Syrup

2 dashes Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and brandied cherry.

With the same base as the Bacardi Vermouth Dry, the Country Club is a more complex rendition and is one of my personal favorites in the entire book. My take is that if you are going to have a cocktail, especially today, when distilleries are creating complex and complete spirits that satisfy on their own, all parts must not only make themselves known but also be harmonious and end with a lingering flourish—like your all-time favorite pop song if it was condensed to only fifteen seconds. The nose, palate, and most important, the finish are what make classic cocktails . . . classic.

Be sure to use a white rum whose flavor profile has a character of its own. The original recipe called for an even ratio of rum to vermouth, but this recipe best fits the modern palate. It also had the curaçao down to a dash, but leaning on the orange-forward liqueur a bit added a viscosity that helped define this cocktail’s identity. You can use Grand Marnier or even Cointreau for equal but unique results. You can also try a “sweet” adaptation, utilizing Carpano Antica sweet vermouth in place of the dry. Both are worthwhile tipples.

Named for the independent women of the Jazz Age, the Flapper is an unassuming, easy drinker that makes for an appetizing predinner cocktail. Substitute grenadine for the demerara syrup and you’ll have what the boys at the Old Bar called a Grenade. They leaned hard on the grenadine; the original recipe called for 2:1 grenadine to remaining ingredients. I considered this a misinterpretation, hence its adapted and much more pleasing inclusion here.

## CREAM PUFF FIZZ

3 oz. chilled club soda

2 oz. Cruzan aged dark rum

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

1 oz. heavy cream

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into serving glass. Stir briefly to integrate. No garnish.

Taking it all the way back to the soda fountain days, this super Fizz (and extremely pleasing Bracer) will be sure to have your guests lining up. The choice of rum plays an important part here. The original recipe called for St. Croix rum, so I went with the aged Cruzan. It works just fine, but you can plug in your rum of choice—just try to steer clear of the superdark varieties here. Please remember that this is a Fizz—once it’s strained there is no additional ice used, so be sure your soda water is well chilled. This may be one of the single best (adult) Egg Creams of all time.

## CREOLE LADY

1 oz. Four Roses small-batch bourbon

1 oz. Sandeman Fine Rich Madeira

½ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

Add all ingredients to small white wineglass (Bordeaux-style). Stir to integrate. Garnish with brandied cherry on a skewer.

“A no-ice cocktail?” you say. Well, prepare to be surprised. It’s quite the after-dinner cordial or accompaniment to a fine cigar.

See Rees for similar presentation.

## CREOLE LADY  Peacock Alley Cocktail Adaptation

1½ oz. Four Roses small-batch bourbon

1 oz. Sandeman Fine Rich Madeira or Lustau Don Nuño oloroso sherry

½ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

2 dashes Peychaud’s bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry and lemon peel.

The Peychaud’s bitters add another dimension to its New Orleans roots. My preferred variation subs oloroso sherry for the Madeira, securing this as a personal favorite. See French Quarter for variation.

## CUBA LIBRE

1 lime

2 oz. Bacardi gold rum

4 oz. Coca-Cola or other cane-based cola

Cut lime into quarters. Squeeze one wedge into chilled Collins glass and discard. Squeeze another and drop into glass. Add rum and ice. Add Coca-Cola and stir briefly to integrate. Reserve the other half of lime for the next serving.

“Free Cuba” was the rallying cry at the end of the Spanish-American war at the turn of the twentieth century. Since the creation of this drink in Cuba by U.S. soldiers, Americans have made it their adopted national Cooler. Not even the Mojito has enjoyed the unwavering popularity that this drink has. I would recommend finding the sugar cane–based (not corn syrup), Mexican-made Coca-Cola or other cane sugar–based cola, for best results.

## CUBAN ROSE

2 oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

1 oz. fresh orange juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

In this Prohibition-era add-on of Mr. Crockett, the freshly squeezed juice and homemade grenadine are essential. I went with the more potent version of Bacardi rum here, but you can experiment with other styles as well. Finally, there was no mention of bitters in the original recipe, but as with most cocktails that include orange juice, after trying one with a good stab of bitters added, there was no going back.

Although there are cocktails of the era named Santiago, they are simply mistitled Bacardi Cocktails. The best and proper Santiago is a Cuban Rose with equal parts rum and orange juice. The result is a lighter, midday tipple that can also be served on the rocks as a brunch treat. If you have some handy (and you should) it can take a couple of dashes of Horsford’s acid phosphate prior to shaking to add some tannin without adding another citrus element or bitters. Amber rums make a nice pairing with orange juice if you want to try a more serious adaptation.

## CUBAN SUNSHINE

2 oz. Caña Brava white rum

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. fresh pineapple juice or puree

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## FLAMINGO  Classic

2 oz. Caña Brava white rum or Rhum J.M agricole white rhum (80 proof)

1 oz. fresh pineapple juice or puree

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

1 dash Peychaud’s bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass (except bitters). Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with one long dash of Peychaud’s bitters across the top of drink.

Originally listed with equal parts in the “Cuban Concoctions” chapter of the Old Books, this adaptation brings the recipe more in line with the modern palate, ensuring that all ingredients keep their own identities. Once again, bitters were not included, but to prepare this without them would be a major disservice. A new summertime staple.

The simple Flamingo is, if not a descendant of the (Cuban) Sunshine, certainly related to it. It first appears in Ted Saucier’s Bottom’s Up (1951) and I have served this crowd-pleaser at numerous events ever since I began bartending.

Though the original recipe called for a “Cuban rum,” through the years I have adapted it to include the white rhum agricole, which is a bit malty and changes a rum cocktail in a way that genever would a gin cocktail. (I use genever here too and call it a Soho Flamingo.) I also tacked on a long dash of Peychaud’s bitters across the top to add the “what is that” quality that we all enjoy and make it a bit more appealing to the eye as well. See Clover Club for variations.

## CUCUMBER RHUMBA  Peacock Alley

4 quarter-inch round slices of fresh cucumber

3 dashes Fee Brothers rhubarb bitters

2 oz. Hendricks gin

¾ oz. Cocchi Americano

¾ oz. fresh orange juice

Place cucumber slices into mixing glass. Add rhubarb bitters and muddle thoroughly. Add remaining ingredients. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Twist an orange peel to release oils, then discard (optional). Garnish with cucumber slice placed vertically on rim of glass.

In my never-ending quest to keep with Hotel tradition and incorporate orange juice as a proper ingredient, I was inspired to fill a request for a summer cocktail “on the fly,” and I came up with this one. The cucumber and Hendricks are a natural pairing and the Cocchi Americano and orange juice bring the grip that really sends this home. Without a doubt, your guests will drink these faster than you can make them, so you may want to consider batching them.

As an alternate preparation, infusing a bottle of Hendricks with a sliced cucumber for a few days will eliminate the need for muddling at the time of your event. Just place in airtight glass jar, stirring every other day. Fine-strain back into bottle and prepare as directed, post-muddle. See Emerald Isle for variation.