The Waldorf Astoria Bar Book

## M

## MACAROON  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. Żubrówka bison grass vodka

1 oz. Pierre Ferrand Pineau des Charentes

½ oz. Luxardo amaretto

½ oz. fresh pineapple juice

2 dashes (or ⅛ oz.) Combier kümmel liqueur

2 oz. chilled club soda

Add all ingredients except club soda to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Collins glass filled with ice cubes. Top with club soda. Stir briefly to integrate. Garnish with toasted shredded coconut. (Toast shredded coconut in pan over medium heat, stirring frequently for three to five minutes until toasted. Allow to cool and store in airtight container.)

In an effort to fill a request for a macaroon-themed summer wedding, I opted to forgo the easy but seasonably unsuitable cream-based, pastel-colored dessert drink for this unique refresher instead. The bison grass–infused vodka has a natural coconut note to it that lent a subtle flavor without screaming it. Pineau des Charentes is a classic French fortified wine that brings complexity and some sweetness to the mix. Though not traditional, the pineapple element makes it familiar, the kümmel makes it unique, and the toasted coconut brings it all home. The bride blushed.

## MAE WEST  Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails

2 oz. Pierre Ferrand Ambre cognac

½ oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

This cocktail, named for the frisky, early twentieth-century actress and sex symbol, is found in Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails (1934). There are other cocktails that bear her name but this one most closely resembles the formula for namesake cocktails of the day (see Charlie Chaplin). They all include a strong base ingredient, citrus, and a sugar component, usually in the form of a liqueur. As far as these things go, the Mae West delivers. I usually prefer lighter and more floral cognacs for cocktail use and would steer clear of full-bodied brandies, as they would dominate here.

A similar recipe that was also a favorite of Tschirky’s was his Martell Cocktail, which substituted honey syrup for the grenadine. Again, try it with a lighter-bodied cognac so the honey can shine through. Finally, you can substitute lemon juice for the lime; just reduce the sweetener by half for a more balanced result and Sidecar alternate.

## MAI TAI  Classic

1 oz. Appleton Estate Reserve Jamaican rum

1 oz. Rhum J.M VSOP agricole

1 oz. fresh lime juice

½ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao or Marie Brizard orange curaçao

½ oz. Torani or Giffard orgeat syrup

1 dash Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with crushed or pellet ice. Garnish with mint sprig.

Most commonly credited to Bay Area tiki restaurateur “Trader” Vic Bergeron (or another local restaurant legend, Don the Beachcomber; sometimes neither), this summertime staple is often requested by our guests. Early recipes included a Jamaican rum that is no longer produced, but just as Trader Vic did, we add the funky rhum agricole at Peacock Alley. I like the complexity that it and the dry curaçao bring to the table. Standard curaçao is a touch sugary but might appeal to those with a bit of a sweet tooth. This one goes easy on the garnish, as the fresh mint’s aroma adds more than enough to this complex offering, though you can add a twist of an orange peel if you’d like. See Fog Cutter for variation.

## MANHATTAN

2 oz. Rittenhouse bonded rye whiskey

1 oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

2 dashes Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry (or lemon peel).

By most accounts, the Manhattan cocktail predates the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel by at least twenty years, but vermouth as a cocktail ingredient was reaching its peak by the time of the Old Bar. In my opinion, all New Yorkers should be proud of this New York City creation. It is one of the first to soften the original Cocktail by tempering it with vermouth and, by doing so, ensuring its longevity as a nightly tipple. As with most of the first editions of these types of cocktails, the vermouth was added in equal portion with the base spirit or even in reverse proportion to today’s Manhattan. I have adapted it here with the modern presentation and palate in mind.

The best renditions are those made with rye whiskey as the base. The higher the proof, the better. Bourbon works fine; just be sure to use a strong one, as it will help the naturally sweeter style of the whiskey stand up to the vermouth and bitters. I prefer 2:1 ratio of whiskey to vermouth, but it is product dependent. Raising the spirit portion up a quarter to half an ounce is recommended when using a whiskey with less alcohol or utilizing a fuller-flavored vermouth such as Punt e Mes.

As for the bitters, I like some variety here. In the winter, aromatic bitters are my choice, whereas I’ll choose the orange variety for a predinner drink on a warm evening. Yes, you will notice a difference. Our culinary director, David Garcelon, insists on aromatic bitters all year round, and I wouldn’t argue, but the choice remains yours. You can even use both. I won’t tell. As with the Old Fashioned, just by altering the bitters, you can enjoy a slightly different cocktail every day. (See bitters recommendations in “Bitters” section.)

Much has been made over the final garnish of a proper Manhattan, so I will just say this: life is short—go for broke and twist a lemon peel over the drink and drop a brandied cherry in it. Now you have it.

In the Old Books, variations are as plentiful as you want. Direct descendants include the Manhattan No. 2, which uses Irish whiskey as its base and a pinch of sugar (see Rob Roy for variation) and  another favorite of mine, the Cuban Manhattan, in which we use Bacardi 8 Year Old dark rum with orange bitters and a twist for remarkable results (also listed as the Palmetto in the Old Books, which used a St. Croix rum; Cruzan Estate Diamond dark rum will work great here but any full-bodied rum will do). The apple brandy–based version is called a Marconi Wireless and it’s a favored variation once autumn rolls around. It was named for Nobel Prize–winning Italian engineer Guglielmo Marconi and his famous radio transmitter (which was the first to send signals across the Atlantic Ocean). Though the device did not survive, recent surveys of cocktail lists prove that this recipe has. I really like the 7½ Year Old expression of Laird’s apple brandy (it is, more or less, American calvados). If it’s unavailable, go with a calvados proper.

The Old Books include Star and Normandie cocktails (names for an old Broadway hotel), both of which are composed of equal amounts of apple brandy and vermouth. The defining characteristic of the fruit gets lost in these; I recommend sticking with this version. Thanksgivings will never be the same.

Lastly, by far the most famous rendition of all is the Manhattan’s Scotch whisky brother, the Rob Roy.

## DRY MANHATTAN

2 oz. WhistlePig 10 Year rye whiskey

1 oz. Dolin de Chambery dry vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

There are two Beadleston cocktails, both named for a local brewer who supplied the Old Bar with much of its beer. Research for these cocktails unearthed the existence of a Dougherty’s Private Stock whiskey, which could be the “Private Stock Whiskey” called for in the Old Waldorf Bar Days recipe. This is an extinct Pennsylvania bonded rye, aged thirteen years, and is probably best simulated by the currently available ten-year-old WhistlePig rye. The Beadleston No. 1 called for equal parts whiskey and dry vermouth and is worth a try (see Manhattan Junior). The lemon peel is my idea—it seems to tie the room together. See Rob Roy for Beadleston No. 2.

The basic Dry Manhattan recipe here was used for the Brown University and the Rosemary cocktails (named for the Broadway production, it was invented for the cast party to celebrate the 1897 opening of the play held at the Old Hotel), save for the inclusion of bourbon instead of rye as the base spirit, and the omission of bitters. I recommend using an orange peel as the garnish when using bourbon, and include orange bitters anyway. If nothing else, you now know that the Dry Manhattan has an original name (or two).

## PERFECT MANHATTAN

2 oz. Knob Creek straight rye whiskey

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

The Perfect Manhattan is also listed as Honolulu No. 2 in the Old Books. How or why that connection was made remains a mystery, but I will chalk it up to a poor recipe transcription by a bartender or a misinterpretation on the part of Mr. Crockett. More obvious is that this is the seasoned veteran’s Manhattan of choice, and for good reason. Complex yet very sippable, it makes for a fine cocktail on any occasion. Again, higher-proof whiskey is the key, and bourbon works well here too. You could also ratchet up the lead spirit by a half ounce if using a less robust whiskey. See Thompson for variation.

## MANHATTAN JUNIOR

1½ oz. Rittenhouse bonded rye whiskey

1½ oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add large ice cubes and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into a chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

The ratios for this Manhattan Junior are the same as those in the first printed version of the cocktail (though it also included a couple of dashes each of gum syrup and aromatic bitters). Mr. Crockett’s instructions clearly state, “No Bitters,” but I prefer to follow this recipe to the letter and exclude them only if using Carpano Antica, Punt e Mes, or another full-flavored sweet vermouth. If you find yourself with a more restrained vermouth, adding a couple of dashes of bitters will make for a much more interesting and balanced result.

## 1860 MANHATTAN  Peacock Alley Variation

2 oz. Elijah Craig 12 Year Old single-barrel bourbon

1 oz. Noilly Prat sweet vermouth

¼ oz. Pierre Ferrand dry curaçao (or Luxardo maraschino liqueur)

2 dashes Angostura bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

One of our most popular cocktails, the 1860 Manhattan has the distinction of being on the menu since Peacock Alley’s restoration in 2005. Our take on the Manhattan is based on early recipes of the era that added accoutrements to their cocktails. Some had the ingredient ratio reversed, with vermouth taking the lead role. Some added gum syrup (see “Syrups”), curaçao, or maraschino as flavor enhancers. To adapt for a modern palate, we leaned toward the orange, since, believe it or not, maraschino liqueur was not as widely available in 2005 as it is today, though both lend the “What is that?” character that most of the best cocktails possess. As for the bitter component, we strictly use our house-made aromatic bitters, but you will not go wrong with experimentation here.

One of the more enjoyable parts of my job involves choosing barrels of whiskey that will one day be included in this special cocktail. Typically, we work with a distillery to purchase a commercially unavailable single barrel of bourbon (rye whiskey is more difficult to procure in this manner). The distillery will send barrel samples, and after we’ve tasted several—usually at barrel strength, but sometimes properly diluted—we choose what we feel will work best in the cocktail. That usually means the whiskey has characteristics that will shine when integrated with other ingredients—spice notes, tannins, and viscosity all play a role—and after about six weeks the entire barrel arrives, bottled and usually with special labeling indicating the pedigree of this unique spirit. Our guests have expressed overwhelming satisfaction knowing that they are taking part in a unique experience that they can enjoy only at the Waldorf Astoria. See Brooklyn, Liberal, Rob Roy, and Waldorf for variations.

## MARBLE HILL

2 oz. New York Distilling Company Dorothy Parker gin

1 oz. Byrrh Grand quinquina aperitif (or Dubonnet)

1 oz. fresh orange juice

2 dashes Abbott’s bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Although geographically connected to the Bronx, Marble Hill is, by law, the most northern part of the borough of Manhattan. It was separated from the island during the construction of the Harlem River Ship Canal in 1895. It remained an island until 1914, when the Harlem River was filled in on the north side, connecting it to the Bronx and cementing its association with the wrong borough. The only place that this makes any kind of sense is in the world of cocktails, as its pedigree makes it a fine alternative to the Bronx cocktail.

I used an NYC-made gin to keep with the theme, and while the original called for Dubonnet, I prefer Byrrh aperitif (pronounced “beer”); its flavor profile is a better match with the other ingredients (and it was around back then). In an effort to add a bit of spine to this easy sipper, I added the unique Abbott’s bitters, but most any will do in this slot. Be adventurous and make it your own. It’s great over ice in the warmer weather as well.

## MARGARITA  Classic

2 oz. Siete Leguas blanco tequila

1 oz. Combier liqueur d’orange

1 oz. fresh lime juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with fresh ice. Garnish with lime wheel. Salted half rim, optional.

## (ALL-IN) MARGARITA  Peacock Alley

1½ oz. Siembra Azul blanco tequila

½ oz. Del Maguey Vida mezcal

½ oz. Cointreau

½ oz. Agavero liqueur

¾ oz. fresh lime juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with fresh ice. Garnish with lime wheel. Salted half rim, optional.

A twentieth-century classic, the Margarita has gone through enough permutations to produce many unique variations. Its first appearance in print is in London’s Café Royal Cocktail Book (1937) as the Picador, though this Daisy has been served in some form since spirits, juice, and sugar were first combined. I’ll just say that like most things in life, it’s best to keep it simple. You can alter the ingredients incrementally to suit your own taste, but at the end of the day the three-ingredient version is best. Some find a touch of agave syrup adds a pleasant viscosity, in which case you’d adjust the orange liqueur accordingly to balance out the sweetness. We use a good 100 percent blanco as a standard, but a reposado tequila adds a depth of flavor and is a nice treat.

You can try a Margarita served up as a predinner cocktail, but if you’re planning to enjoy more than one, nothing makes summer afternoons more agreeable than a Margarita on the rocks. As for salt, I prefer not to salt the rim, but when in the mood, I drop a pinch of kosher salt into the mixing glass prior to shaking. It won’t taste salty but will be slightly more balanced, like in a Paloma. Resistance to taking another sip will be futile.

The (All-In) Margarita was a result of a happy accident. We were prebatching Mezcal-enhanced Margaritas for a large event when one of the catering managers who was lending a hand mistakenly assumed Agavero was a form of curaçao or triple sec and added it to the batch. In actuality, it is a tequila-based liqueur flavored with the Mexican-grown damiana flower. When taste-tested, the drinks made with the Agavero had their own unique flavor profile. When we realized what had happened and identified the oddball ingredient, this refined rendition was born. It is quite the powerhouse, so utilizing crushed or pellet ice is a nice alternative serving. You can also omit the Agavero liqueur and prepare a standard Margarita and float the Mezcal on top for a smoky version. It makes a great pairing with barbecue.

For our Border Flower, we use Gran Centenario Rosangel as the base of a standard Margarita. It is a reposado tequila that is finished in port barrels for two months, then infused with hibiscus flowers. We then top it with three drops of rose water and three baby rose petals as garnish. Aside from being a highly enjoyable variation on the theme, the buds are so visually striking they almost always command orders from nearby tables. If Rosangel is unavailable, any favorite reposado will do. A charming Margarita if there ever was one.

## MARMALADE

1½ oz. Plymouth London dry gin

¾ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

1 bar spoon Bonne Maman orange marmalade

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

At first glance this could be easily dismissed as yet another Bronx cocktail alternate. The difference here is the actual marmalade, which, strangely enough, was not included in the transcribed recipe of the Old Books. Then it was just shaken with a couple of orange slices, but as with the Amsterdam cocktail, I couldn’t resist giving it a proper nod and worthy connection to the title.

I’ve been making cocktails a long time and every once in a while I come across one in which the addition of bitters somehow brings out a sweet note in a recipe, and this is one, so I omitted them. The dual vermouths add enough complexity, as does the toasty marmalade. Look for this one to surprise you.

## MARTINEZ

1½ oz. Tanqueray Old Tom gin

1½ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

2 dashes Angostura bitters or Dr. Adam Elmegirab’s Boker’s bitters

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## BRIDAL

2 oz. Plymouth gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## SILVER

1½ oz. Portobello Road No. 171 London dry gin

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

2 dashes Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

⅛ oz. Gum Syrup (optional)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## PEACOCK ALLEY MARTINEZ

2 oz. Ransom Old Tom gin or Greenhook Ginsmiths Old Tom gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

1 dash Angostura bitters

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

## SOUTH OF THE BORDER MARTINEZ  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Cazadores reposado tequila

1 oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur

2 dashes house-made Cocoa Bitters (or Fee Brothers Aztec chocolate bitters)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

First found in print in 1884 (yes—1884!) in O. H. Byron’s The Modern Bartenders’ Guide, the Martinez was described as an enhanced gin-based Manhattan, and I wholeheartedly agree, especially if you take into account that some of the first Manhattan recipes included touches of gum syrup, absinthe, curaçao, or maraschino. Ultimately, it became one of the first wave of cocktails to capitalize on vermouth’s newfound popularity, in the late nineteenth century. From that point forward, a significant percentage of memorable cocktails contained an aromatized wine of some sort (as you can tell from the number of recipes in this book alone).

Incidentally, the Martinez (traditionally prepared with genever or Old Tom gin) is not listed by name in either of the Old Books; besides Martini cocktails that omit the defining maraschino element, the recipe for the Bridal comes closest. You can view this as a modern take on the classic proportions, as it leans on the gin and better represents the modern palate.

The Silver, at its heart, is simply a dry, modern Martinez. It first appeared in print in Harry Johnson’s Bartenders’ Manual (1900) with London dry gin in the starring role, and later with genever taking the lead. The Old Books simply state “gin,” which I have interpreted as meaning London dry, since other variants are listed as such (Old Tom, genever/Holland, Plymouth). You don’t have to sweeten this cocktail at all, so just omit the syrup entirely or use an Old Tom gin if that’s your preference. You can also just bump the maraschino up to a third of an ounce if leaning on the sweet side of things. With all of these recipes you can use a 2:1 spirit-to-vermouth ratio for an alternate presentation. It’s certainly appropriate on Friday nights.

As for the alternate versions, our Peacock Alley rendition of the classic Martinez includes barrel-aged Old Tom gin. This results in a unique flavor profile, as the herbal and toasted notes of the gin are both displayed. The addition of dry vermouth and two types of bitters lends an adult complexity to the finish. We purchased large used bourbon barrels from Tuthilltown Sprits distillery, in upstate New York, and filled them with New York Distilling Company Perry’s Tot navy-strength gin. After aging for two months, the gin absorbs the sweet notes of the whiskey while the heat of this high-proof spirit is tempered, making for one heck of a singular sensation (and a great gin and tonic as well!). This is another cocktail that I have trouble taking off the menu. The two commercially available barrel-aged gins, Ransom and Greenhook Ginsmiths, are excellent products and shine in this recipe.

Finally, our own South of the Border Martinez uses tequila as the base spirit and takes advantage of the Carpano Antica sweet vermouth and tequila’s natural, happy coexistence with cocoa. A unique offering for sure. See Guion and Turf for variations.

MARTINI

The following recipes are reprinted in the form that they appear in the Old Books.

Though other, more practiced renditions may be currently used, I’ve opted to feature the Old Bar’s adaptations, as they are excellent drinks in their own right. Included here are only recipes of cocktails with some sort of gin taking the lead with added vermouth and bitters, served up with no adornment other than an olive, citrus peel, or onion as garnish. In an effort to compartmentalize them, if for no other reason than to have all of the variations on the theme in one section for easier replication, I tried to “umbrella” as many as made sense.

The first recipe is the workaday version, a starting point, if you will. It is followed by the six variants with the grand title of “Martini.” What follows from Amsterdam to Newport are the remaining titled siblings. All told, this section holds about sixty versions, each one unique and each worth trying.

This first recipe represents a modern take in the manner in which we serve a classic dry Martini in the Hotel today. You may adjust for personal taste accordingly.

## MARTINI  Modern

3 oz. Beefeater London dry gin

½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and/or Queen Anne olive (optional).

Add a pickled cocktail onion as garnish for a modern-day Gibson.*

## MARTINI  Fifty Fifty/Dry

1½ oz. Tanqueray London dry gin

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and/or Queen Anne olive (optional).

Originally listed as a “Martini (Dry No. 2).”

Also listed as Cornell, Gibson, Lynne.

Add orange bitters for a St. Francis.

Use Plymouth gin for Shake-Up Silo, Lewis, My Own.

Use Plymouth gin and orange bitters for Dewey, Marguerite.

Use Plymouth gin, orange bitters, and orange peel for Delmonico, Racquet Club.

Use Hayman’s Old Tom gin and Angostura bitters for West India.

## MARTINI  Dry

2 oz. Beefeater London dry gin

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth*

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel and/or Queen Anne olive.

Also listed as Mrs. Thompson.

Add orange bitters for Good Times.

Use Plymouth gin and orange peel for Gibson No. 2.

Use Plymouth gin and orange bitters for Hoffman House.

## MARTINI  Fifty Fifty/Sweet

1½ oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin

1½ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Also listed as Bradford, Gold, Olivet.

Omit bitters for Thanksgiving.

Use Beefeater London dry gin for Pell, Shafter, Walter Monteith.

Use Beefeater London dry gin and omit bitters for Dowd.

Use Plymouth gin for Lone Tree.

Use Plymouth gin and orange peel for Christ (No. 1).

Use Plymouth gin, orange bitters, and Angostura bitters for Hearst.

## MARTINI  Sweet

2 oz. Bombay London dry gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Also listed as Down.

Use orange twist for Delatour.

Omit orange bitters and use three dashes Peychaud’s bitters for Hilliard.

Omit bitters for Hamlin.

Omit bitters and add orange twist for Rossington.

Use Plymouth gin, omit orange bitters, and use Angostura bitters for Club Cocktail No. 2.

## MARTINI  Perfect

1½ oz. Bombay London dry gin

¾ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

¾ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.*

Omit bitters for MacLean, Mr. Vandervere.

Use Hayman’s Old Tom gin and omit bitters for Somerset.

Use Plymouth gin and omit bitters for Grand Vin.

Use Plymouth gin, omit bitters, and add orange peel garnish for H. P. Whitney.

## MARTINI  Equal Parts

1 oz. Tanqueray London dry gin

1 oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Also listed as Hall.

Omit bitters for Perfect No. 2.

Omit bitters and use orange peel as garnish for Pomeroy, Rossington No. 2.

Use Hayman’s Old Tom gin for Somerset.

Use Plymouth gin with orange peel twist for Johnson.

Use Plymouth gin, omit bitters, and use orange peel garnish for Perfect.

Use Plymouth gin, omit orange bitters, use two dashes of Peychaud’s bitters, and add orange peel garnish for Jimmie Lee.

## AMSTERDAM  Genever

2 oz. Bols genever

½ oz. Cinzano Rosso sweet vermouth

½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Of the many edits that I made to the original recipe, this was one of the most obvious. The London dry gin called for in the Old Books does not exactly link itself to Amsterdam, hence the inclusion of a Holland genever spirit here. The recipe was also vague as to which vermouth to use. After trying both separately, I’ve opted to use both together, making this a “perfect” genever Martini as well as giving it its own identity. It is also one of the relatively few cocktails in the Old Books that specify a garnish, calling for a lemon peel. I think in this version, the orange peel complements the natural complexity of the combination of ingredients and coexists with the bitters as well. See Turf for variation.

## EASY  Enhanced

2¾ oz. Bombay London dry gin

¼ oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

Add ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

If using a less robust vermouth, add another quarter ounce, along with a dash of orange bitters. This one is a surprising new favorite. It does so much with very little. See All Right for variation.

## HAPPY DAYS  Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails

2½ oz. Hayman’s Old Tom gin*

¼ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Martini Gran Lusso sweet vermouth

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

Also listed as “Sunshine.”

Use Bombay London dry gin and omit bitters (keep them in anyway) for Gladwin.

## NEWPORT  Unique Blend

1¼ oz. Tanqueray London dry gin

1¼ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¾ oz. Carpano Antica sweet vermouth

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

I am of the generation that when someone brings up the subject of the Martini, this is the cocktail that comes to mind: Primarily London dry gin with a touch of dry vermouth, garnished with an unstuffed Queen Anne olive and, if I’m really in the mood, a lemon twist. It is, after all, how my parents and their cohorts enjoyed theirs. One (or if at home, two) before dinner, stirred, cold, and bracing. The gin—very juniper-forward, in a way that few distilleries produce the spirit today—is part of the reason that pro–vodka Martini people grimace at the thought of a gin-based cocktail. This is the spice-leaning spirit they are thinking of. In terms of flavor, gin has moved toward the center, but in a manner that lifts and broadens the entire spirit. Ramping up the citrus, floral, and botanical notes, keeping the juniper and licorice on the edges, and even incorporating cucumber and some other unique ingredients into the distillation process is transforming this once-intimidating spirit and elevating it to such crowd-pleasing heights. There are a fair share of classic-styled London dry gins being produced (and it better stay that way), and I strongly suggest trying them. Anything that can have your guests expand their horizons and move away from the completely bland is a good thing. Don’t get me wrong, I think vodka is a fine spirit, and it too has improved over the years. I will say that nothing comes close to it as a pairing for smoked fish or caviar, but personally, I feel it lacks the character and charm that gin has in spades.

As for the category itself, the Martini, in any incarnation, predates the Old Bar by several years, with the first Old Tom/sweet vermouth version first found in print in 1884. The first dry (1:1 ratio) version seems to have come into being around the early 1890s. Then, somewhere around the time of the Old Hotel, there are several named cocktails that are listed in the Old Books made with a 2:1 ratio of dry gin to dry vermouth. Others follow, save for a ratio difference here and a dash of bitters there. In the end it really doesn’t matter. These drinks and their kind were popular in their day, were simple and satisfying enough to be served in houses both public and private, and have thankfully survived to be enjoyed today.

Having so many variations of the cocktail to grapple with forced me to incorporate strict parameters as to what would define a Martini. As I have mentioned in the introduction to this section, only recipes with gin, vermouth, and/or bitters were included. Any cocktail recipe with enhancements such as absinthe rinses, drops of grenadine, and the like were separated out and received their own entries. Although I’ve opted not to list it, the modern-day Dirty Martini variation, with its ample amount of added olive brine, would certainly fall into this category.

Now, let’s get down to the nitty-gritty. A Martini is never, ever shaken, and no, shaking does not make it any colder. Professors have been hired, equipment rented, and tests performed. If you stir your cocktail for the proper amount of time, relative to the size of your ice, your Martini will reach its desired state of arctic chill while maintaining its leaden imprint on your palate—and all without shards of ice continuing to dilute it for minutes after serving. That goes for 95 percent of all recipes not containing dairy or fruit juice. My closing thought on the subject is this: so important is the stirring of the cocktail that when someone is preparing one for me and he does nothing else right but stir it, he is already home.

Like the Old Fashioned, the Martini has evolved through the years. Its relationship with vermouth went from a full-on partnership (first with the sweet/Italian and then the dry/French style) to that of a longtime colleague who has moved to the sister office across town and whom you only see at the company picnic. The first variants were pretty sweet, as they were 1:1 ratios of Old Tom gin and sweet vermouth (some early recipes even included dashes of gum syrup!). Even when adventurous barmen of the late 1800s ramped up the Old Tom and cut back the sweet vermouth, it wasn’t enough to add real longevity to these versions. They live on more famously and with tangible enhancements as a Martinez, for one.

For recipes that include sweet vermouth but do not call for bitters and you want to stay within the intended results, this would be a good time to use a more full-flavored vermouth such as Carpano Antica, Punt e Mes, or Martini Gran Lusso. You could include barrel-aged Old Tom gins such as Greenhook Ginsmiths and Ransom along with these full-bodied vermouths for more robust results, but you are certainly getting into Manhattan territory if you do. As you can probably already tell, a very thin line separated most of these concoctions. I think their strengths lay in their ability to retain their own identity despite their similarities.

The dry version of this cocktail was due another fate entirely. Originally, a Dry Martini meant the use of London dry gin (as opposed to the sweeter Old Tom gin) and dry or French vermouth. It wasn’t necessarily related to the amount of vermouth used. As you can see by the early recipes listed here, vermouth mostly split equal billing with the preferred gin of choice. As time went on, and especially post-Prohibition, vermouth was used less and probably grew increasingly rancid because it became less desirable as an ingredient in general. By the 1960s, the gin was served well chilled, diluted with ice, and with barely any added vermouth. To this day, there are holdovers who shudder at the thought of vermouth in their Martini.

The interesting thing is, if you omit the vermouth, you are not having a Martini at all. The Old Books listed this cocktail as a Bunyan (please see this entry for some appealing variations). I maintain that vermouth is an essential part of the cocktail and is its defining ingredient.

When you’re purchasing vermouth for home use, I suggest buying half bottles (375 ml.) and keeping them in the refrigerator. They will be depleted more quickly and remain fresh for at least one month or more. You can also cook with it if rotation is an issue. As for bitters, I personally think that they are optional in the modern-day dry version, where gin is the star and does the heavy lifting. If making a Fifty Fifty or even a “wet” rendition (one with a 2:1 ratio of gin to vermouth), a dash or two of orange bitters are indispensable and really perks things up.

Most pre-Prohibition cocktail recipes were quite stingy when it came to garnishes and instructions. I think it may be because the use of something as common as citrus peels was just assumed, as most of these books were written for bartenders. Either way, lemon peel works in all of these recipes, though some specifically called for an orange twist or an olive. In the listings here, I tried to be as specific as possible and link a particular garnish to its corresponding recipe in the Old Books. Though, as I’ve mentioned, the garnish is entirely up to you, especially if none is listed. But I would avoid the use of olives as a garnish in any recipe containing sweet vermouth. As a side note, I personally enjoy what I call a “Dickens” garnish in my dry Martini as it incorporates both an “Olive & Twist” (wink and nudge inserted here!).

Lastly, at Peacock Alley we hand-stuff our own Queen Anne olives with Gorgonzola cheese for one of the most decadent garnishes (and bites) you can possibly have. I strongly suggest doing so yourself. Simply place some room-temperature cheese (of your choice, just make it as savory as you can take it) in a small plastic bag and mash until smooth. Then cut a small end from the corner of the bag to “pipe” or squeeze it into the olives. It’s a bit laborious but your guests will love you for it. By the way, in this case there is no commercial product that comes close to the homemade item.

## MCKINLEY’S DELIGHT/ REMEMBER THE MAINE

2 oz. Michter’s rye whiskey

¾ oz. Martini & Rossi sweet vermouth

½ oz. Rothman & Winter orchard cherry liqueur or Heering cherry liqueur

¼ oz. Pernod liqueur

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

This one, named for assassinated president William McKinley and then appropriated as a commemorative cocktail for the USS Maine battleship (which sank in Havana Harbor in 1898 and became a catalyst for the Spanish-American War). As far as cocktails go, this one pops up on menus every now and then. It works fine as the enhanced Manhattan that it is. A somewhat adventurous alternative.

## MERRY WIDOW (Or Mary Garden)  (Waldorf-Astoria Version)

1½ oz. Byrrh Grand quinquina aperitif (Maurin quina or Dubonnet, if unavailable)

1½ oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Luxardo maraschino liqueur or Grand Marnier (optional)

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 15 seconds to integrate. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry.

## POET’S DREAM (ADAPTED)

2 oz. Tanqueray London dry gin

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

½ oz. Bénédictine liqueur

2 drops Émile Pernot Vieux Pontarlier absinthe

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with lemon peel.

What became recognized as the Waldorf-Astoria version of the Merry Widow cocktail was more than likely a little-seen tipple (named for an opera singer of the day) known as the Mary Garden. Some earlier printed recipes of the Merry Widow (probably named for the nineteenth-century operetta) also cite it as the Mary Garden. In Recipes for Mixed Drinks (1917), New York bartender Hugo Ensslin includes gin along with several enhancements. The kicker is, his is the first book to include both the Mary Garden and the Merry Widow in the forms listed here. Even Oscar Tschirky’s pal Jacques Straub, in Drinks (1914), listed the Mary Garden as the Merry Widow. By the time Mr. Crockett recorded the Waldorf’s version in 1931, the two drinks were one, though both versions have survived the ages, and for good reason.

The Waldorf’s Widow is a lighter recipe, perfect for warmer weather. If opting for one of the enhancements, try both, as they each have something unique to offer. Be adventurous here: almost anything can work—Chartreuse, kümmel, etc. You will realize how much a mere quarter ounce brings to the table. The Hugo Ensslin, gin-based version, is perfect for whenever you’re in the mood for a Martini but have a hankering for something a little bit different.

Finally, the Poet’s Dream is listed as such in the books but is obviously influenced by the Merry Widow, if not incorrectly listed with equal parts of gin, vermouth, and Bénédictine. It was not the best cocktail in the world, so I’ve adapted it based on the earlier published recipe (1916). Mr. Straub’s version omits the absinthe. The Savoy’s (1931) does not. See Guion and Salomé for variations.

## METROPOLE

2 oz. Hine VSOP cognac

1 oz. Sacred extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. Gum Syrup or Simple Syrup

2 dashes Peychaud’s bitters

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with brandied cherry and lemon peel.

Named for the old Times Square area, Hotel Metropole (which closed in 1912) was, Mr. Crockett implied, quite the after-hours joint. This nineteenth-century cocktail’s original recipe called for equal parts brandy and vermouth, and you can make it as such, but I think that this adapted version makes for the better nightcap.

For a similar cocktail of the era, the Metropolitan, just switch out these bitters for three dashes of Angostura bitters. The Old Books recipe for this cocktail leaned quite heavily on a defunct brand of bitters (Manhattan Bitters) in ounce form. If you are feeling adventurous, add a few more dashes of Angostura (incrementally) until you reach your desired level of spiciness. These recipes date back to their first appearance in print in 1884 and joined a whole new genre of drinks that included a newly popular import, vermouth.

Another adventurous way to approach either of these cocktails would be to omit the syrup and dry vermouth and add one ounce of bianco-style vermouth (the sweetened, clear version—I like Contratto bianco here) or even Cocchi Americano, for a slightly different take. These are interesting tweaks that don’t veer too far from the original intention but add a bit of variety and complexity to the final result.

## MILK PUNCH

2 oz. Pierre Ferrand 1840 cognac or Royer Force 53 VSOP cognac

½ oz. Simple Syrup

1½ oz. whole milk

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake to integrate. Fine-strain into Old Fashioned glass filled with large ice cubes. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg.

Dating back to 1600s England, milk Punches peaked in popularity in the late 1800s, but were called for often enough at the Old Bar that several variations were included in the Old Books. The Jamaica Milk Punch split the spirit portion with Jamaican rum (Appleton Estate Reserve is recommended). A classic.

The Whiskey Milk Punch is just that: rye whiskey used in the recipe here. It also does the job nicely. The New Orleans Milk Punch adds a couple of drops of pure organic vanilla extract (and the cognac can be subbed out for high-proof bourbon as an alternate) and in my opinion is probably the best variation of them all. I took that recipe one step further and steeped bourbon with a couple of whole vanilla beans for about two weeks with tremendous results.*

## BOSTON MILK PUNCH

1 oz. Cruzan Estate Diamond dark rum

1 oz. Crown Royal Canadian whiskey

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

2 oz. whole milk

Freshly grated nutmeg

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into wineglass or goblet. Garnish with a pinch of freshly grated nutmeg.

This old variation of the classic Milk Punch has two base spirits and is not served on ice, which earns this its own entry. I particularly like the inclusion of the nutmeg grated directly into the mixing glass prior to shaking. The original recipe specifies St. Croix rum, hence the inclusion of Cruzan rum, but any rich, dark rum will do. I’ve chosen the flavorful but unobtrusive Crown Royal for the whiskey portion, which adds to the pleasing viscosity and has little burn. All in all, it’s a nice alternative to an Alexander, especially around the holidays.

## CREAM PUNCH

1½ oz. Rémy Martin 1738 Accord Royal cognac

1 oz. Combier Liqueur d’Orange

1½ oz. whole milk

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with freshly grated nutmeg.

These simple ingredients make for a classic Milk Punch variation. The secret here, as in all milk Punches, is the use of whole milk rather than cream. You don’t want a heavy after-dinner drink as the idea is to be able to enjoy more than one. You may present this on ice as you would a standard Milk Punch. See Alexander for variations.

## MILLIONAIRE

2 oz. Berry Bros. & Rudd No. 3 London dry gin

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

Mr. Crockett’s original transcription was simply “Dry Martini with Grenadine on top.” Well, right off the bat I knew that was not going to work. The heavy-bodied grenadine would just sink to the bottom of the cocktail glass, leaving an incongruous last sip. What did work was mixing it with the gin and vermouth and adding a dash of orange bitters to temper and balance the whole thing. Another of the Old Books’ pleasant surprises. You can omit the bitters for a slightly sweeter result, but if you do, I recommend a lemon twist.

## MISSISSIPPI PUNCH

1½ oz. Courvoisier VSOP cognac

¾ oz. Appleton Estate 12 Year Old rum

¾ oz. Jim Beam bourbon

½ oz. Simple Syrup

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into Old Fashioned glass or Hoffman House goblet filled with ice cubes. Garnish with orange wheel and seasonal fruit.

This old Punch dates back to the mid-1800s and actually called for larger portions of each ingredient. I kept it in line with a modern serving and reduced it accordingly. Although this is a strong, slow sipper, you can be adventurous and move the rum into the lead spot or, if you like, use equal portions of each. Don’t worry, this sturdy recipe can take it. You could also roll this one for a traditional presentation. The original recipe specifies crushed ice, but as with any Punch, ice cubes would be the usual call.

## MOJITO

12 fresh mint leaves (plus one sprig reserved for garnish)

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

2½ oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

1 oz. fresh lime juice

2 oz. chilled club soda

Add mint and simple syrup to mixing glass and muddle. Add rum and lime juice and fill with ice. Shake well and double-strain into Collins glass filled with fresh ice. Top with club soda. Garnish with reserved mint sprig.

## NEW MEXICO MOJITO  Peacock Alley

Fresh cilantro leaves (enough to fill the center of your cupped palm)

4 fresh mint leaves

¾ oz. organic light agave syrup (1:1 ratio of agave and water)

2½ oz. 86 Co. Cabeza blanco tequila

1 oz. fresh lime juice

2 oz. chilled club soda

Add cilantro, mint, and agave syrup to mixing glass and muddle. Add tequila and lime juice and fill with ice. Shake well and double-strain into Collins glass filled with fresh ice. Top with club soda. Garnish with lime wheel.

## PEACH

(Build for presentation in order listed)

BUILD IN A PINT GLASS:

¾ oz. Simple Syrup

12 fresh mint leaves (plus one sprig reserved for garnish)

MUDDLE GENTLY:

½ oz. fresh lemon juice

½ oz. fresh lime juice

2½ oz. Bacardi y Cia Heritage white rum

Fill with alternating layers of shaved or pellet ice and peach slices.

Top with shaved or pellet ice. Garnish with mint sprig. Serve with straw.

This classic has become synonymous with summertime parties, though what most people don’t realize is that versions of it have been served for centuries. In fact, a simple rendition of this recipe is listed in the Old Books, and I like to picture plenty of these things going over the Old Bar, in that high-ceilinged and non-air-conditioned room. I know one thing for certain: the moment the heat rises past 80 degrees on the island of Manhattan, requests for Mojitos go up with every degree at Peacock Alley (and every other bar in town).

Demerara syrup can be substituted for the white simple syrup for a slightly earthier result. You would be missing out if you didn’t try it at least once.

A good bartender’s tip is to “clean” the shaker by pouring some club soda into the shaker tin and swirling it around to combine with anything left over from the shaking of the drink and then pour that on top of the drink as a bit of a flavorful bonus.

The New Mexico Mojito is a cilantro-tinged variation which leans on the herbal notes and agave nectar for the sugar component. I created it for those who occasionally want to deviate from the classic version.

As for the Peach, it’s listed strictly for its presentation purposes as it was in the Old Books. If you’d like a Peach Mojito, simply prepare a basic Mojito and add a cubed third of a ripe peach, muddled along with the mint and sugar.

## MONKEY GLAND  Classic

2 oz. Bombay London dry gin

1 oz. fresh orange juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine (or Raspberry Syrup)

¼ oz. Émile Pernot Vieux Pontarlier absinthe

¼ oz. fresh lemon juice or 3 dashes Horsford’s acid phosphate

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. No garnish.

## MONKEY MARGARITA  Peacock Alley

2 oz. Fidencio Classico Mezcal Vida mezcal

1 oz. fresh orange juice

¼ oz. Émile Pernot Vieux Pontarlier absinthe

¼ oz. Cointreau

¼ oz. fresh lime juice

¼ oz. house-made Grenadine

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Fine-strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

## RUSSIAN GRAND DUKE  Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails

2 oz. Russian Standard vodka or Martell VSOP cognac

1 oz. fresh orange juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

¼ oz. Pernod Original Recipe absinthe

1 dash Regan’s Orange Bitters No. 6

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and shake well. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

This is yet another Prohibition-era cocktail and you can see why it was popular. Although created in Europe, where proper spirits were available, it was still potable if you used less than top-quality gin, as the other ingredients propped it up. Whether true or not, it is supposedly titled for a technique that included the grafting of actual monkey glands to human glands to help aid in the raising of the male libido. No further comment here.

Other variations of the day included the substitution of Bénédictine for the absinthe. The result is a different animal altogether, but is worth a try. Most recipes called for the inclusion of grenadine as the sweetener, but raspberry syrup was also listed in some early recipes and I prefer it. Not only is it sweet, but it adds a bit of tang to the mix, which the orange juice can use. Somewhere along the line, I began adding a couple of dashes of lemon juice to this cocktail and now I cannot enjoy it without. If you want to avoid the addition of another citrus fruit, I have also topped a standard Monkey Gland with a few drops of our house-made cranberry bitters, though orange bitters would work in a pinch. You can argue that with all of these adaptations it kind of becomes another cocktail, but so be it. At the end of the day, that’s how cocktails are born.

The Monkey Margarita was a Repeal Day celebration cocktail in which a twist on a Prohibition-era classic was requested and I came up with this. I really like the savory note of the entire recipe. You could easily switch in a good reposado tequila for the mezcal, if you so wish.

Oscar Tschirky’s 100 Famous Cocktails includes a Russian Grand Duke. Why he used cognac as the base spirit for this close cousin of Harry MacElhone’s Monkey Gland may never be known, though their similarity cannot be denied. This complex sipper is listed as the “Russian” in the Old Books. Mr. Crockett alludes that there was another cocktail in which vodka took the lead “but was seldom called for.” With no other mention of another “Russian” cocktail, I made the assumption that the vodka-based Russian was just that, the same cocktail with vodka in the lead. I tried it and liked it, so we’re keeping it.

## MONTANA

1 oz. Royer VSOP cognac

1 oz. Noilly Prat extra dry vermouth

1 oz. Graham’s ruby port wine

1 dash Regans’ Orange Bitters No. 6 (optional)

Add all ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 30 seconds. Strain into chilled cocktail glass. Garnish with orange peel.

According to Mr. Crockett, many of the patrons of the Old Bar hailed from this fine state; I guess this cocktail was their idea. Either way, it’s a unique item. I used ruby port, which is most likely what would’ve been on hand in the time of the Old Bar, though a tawny makes for an interesting result. Try both.

I found an earlier version in Jacques Straub’s Drinks (1914) that included Angostura bitters and anisette. Try as I might to fix it, it remained a mishmash. If I were to modify this recipe at all, I would pull back on the dry vermouth and port by a quarter of an ounce each and add half an ounce to the cognac slot for a more robust cocktail with a long and interesting finish.

## MONT BLANC FIZZ

2 oz. chilled club soda

2 oz. St. George Absinthe Verte

1 oz. orgeat syrup

½ egg white

Add chilled club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Strain into small Collins or Fizz glass. Stir quickly with bar spoon to integrate. No garnish.

This looked like yet another recipe that was going to take major tinkering to make it palatable, but I couldn’t have been more wrong. The note from Old Waldorf Bar Days read, “It took an imaginative bartender to see a resemblance to a white-topped mountain in a foaming glass.” Believe me, after one of these strong Fizzes, you might be seeing other sights as well. The full two ounces of absinthe means this packs quite the punch. If you wanted to tone it down a bit (or have more than one), Pernod or Ricard pastis could fit the bill in that slot.

## MORNING GLORY FIZZ

2 oz. chilled club soda

2 oz. Compass Box Great King St. blended Scotch whisky

¾ oz. lemon juice

½ oz. Simple Syrup

2 dashes Émile Pernot Vieux Pontarlier absinthe

½ egg white

Add club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Dry-shake for 5 seconds. Add ice and shake for 10 seconds. Strain into small Collins or Fizz glass. Stir briefly with bar spoon to integrate. Twist lemon peel to release oils, then discard.

## BRANDY MORNING GLORY FIZZ

1½ oz. chilled club soda

1 oz. Hardy VSOP cognac

1 oz. Michter’s US 1 single-barrel straight rye whiskey

¼ oz. Combier Liqueur d’Orange

2 dashes Émile Pernot Vieux Pontarlier absinthe

2 dashes Dr. Adam Elmegirab’s Boker’s bitters or Angostura bitters

Add club soda to small Collins or Fizz glass. Add remaining ingredients to mixing glass. Add ice and stir for 60 revolutions. Strain into small Collins glass. Stir to incorporate club soda. Twist lemon peel to release oils, then discard.

This classic Fizz predates the Old Bar by at least ten years and deserves to see a comeback. It’s airy, and with a lighter Scotch whisky at the base, it can make quite the Bracer. It’s also nice during late afternoons in the summertime . . . possibly enhanced by pairing it with a fresh oyster or three!

As for the brandy variation, it is one of the first multispirit cocktails with both whiskey and brandy sharing top billing. This must’ve been quite the best seller at the Old Bar, as it covered a lot of ground. The ingredients here all matter; the club soda does not hide much. Traditionally, one would add in a touch of superfine sugar when incorporating the soda water, but I think it can do without it. Substitute Champagne for the club soda when something really special is in order.